['Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder', 'Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the illness, but not both motor and vocal.', 'The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since first tic onset.', 'Onset is before age 18 years.', 'The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).', 'Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder.', ' Specify if:', 'With motor tics only', 'With vocal tics only', 'The “motor tics only” or “vocal tics only” specifier is only required for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder.', 'Tic disorders comprise four diagnostic categories: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, and the other specified and unspecified tic disorders. Diagnosis for any tic disorder is based on the presence of motor and/or vocal tics (Criterion A), duration of tic symptoms (Criterion B), age at onset (Criterion C), and absence of any known cause such as another medical condition or substance use (Criterion D). The tic disorders are hierarchical in order (i.e., Tourette’s disorder, followed by persistent [chronic] motor or vocal tic disorder, followed by provisional tic disorder, followed by the other specified and unspecified tic disorders), such that once a tic disorder at one level of the hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower hierarchy diagnosis cannot be made (Criterion E).', 'Tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or vocalizations. An individual may have various tic symptoms over time, but at any point in time, the tic repertoire recurs in a characteristic fashion. Although tics can include almost any muscle group or vocalization, certain tic symptoms, such as eye blinking or throat clearing, are common across patient populations. Tics are generally experienced as involuntary but can be voluntarily suppressed for varying lengths of time(Bloch et al. 2011; Singer 2011).', 'Tics can be either simple or complex. Simple motor tics are of short duration (i.e., milliseconds) and can include eye blinking, shoulder shrugging, and extension of the extremities. Simple vocal tics include throat clearing, sniffing, and grunting often caused by contraction of the diaphragm or muscles of the oropharynx. Complex motor tics are of longer duration (i.e., seconds) and often include a combination of simple tics such as simultaneous head turning and shoulder shrugging. Complex tics can appear purposeful, such as a tic-like sexual or obscene gesture (copropraxia) or a tic-like imitation of someone else’s movements (echopraxia). Similarly, complex vocal tics include repeating one’s own sounds or words (palilalia), repeating the last-heard word or phrase (echolalia), or uttering socially unacceptable words, including obscenities, or ethnic, racial, or religious slurs (coprolalia). Importantly, coprolalia is an abrupt, sharp bark or grunt utterance and lacks the prosody of similar inappropriate speech observed in human interactions.', 'The presence of motor and/or vocal tics varies across the four tic disorders (Criterion A). For Tourette’s disorder, both motor and vocal tics must be present, whereas for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, only motor or only vocal tics are present. For provisional tic disorder, motor and/or vocal tics may be present. For other specified or unspecified tic disorders, the movement disorder symptoms are best characterized as tics but are atypical in presentation or age at onset, or have a known etiology.', 'The 1-year minimum duration criterion (Criterion B) assures that individuals diagnosed with either Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder have had persistent symptoms. Tics wax and wane in severity, and some individuals may have tic-free periods of weeks to months; however, an individual who has had tic symptoms of greater than 1 year’s duration since first tic onset would be considered to have persistent symptoms regardless of duration of tic-free periods. For an individual with motor and/or vocal tics of less than 1 year since first tic onset, a provisional tic disorder diagnosis can be considered. There is no duration specification for other specified and unspecified tic disorders. The onset of tics must occur prior to age 18 years (Criterion C). Tic disorders typically begin in the prepubertal period, with an average age at onset between 4 and 6 years, and with the incidence of new-onset tic disorders decreasing in the teen years. New onset of tic symptoms in adulthood is exceedingly rare(Jankovic et al. 2010) and is often associated with exposures to drugs (e.g., excessive cocaine use) or is a result of a central nervous system insult (e.g., postviral encephalitis). Although tic onset is uncommon in teenagers and adults, it is not uncommon for adolescents and adults to present for an initial diagnostic assessment and, when carefully evaluated, provide a history of milder symptoms dating back to childhood. New-onset abnormal movements suggestive of tics outside of the usual age range should result in evaluation for other movement disorders or for specific etiologies.', 'Tic symptoms cannot be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D). When there is strong evidence from the history, physical examination, and/or laboratory results to suggest a plausible, proximal, and probable cause for a tic disorder, a diagnosis of other specified tic disorder should be used.', 'Having previously met diagnostic criteria for Tourette’s disorder negates a possible diagnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder (Criterion E). Similarly, a previous diagnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder negates a diagnosis of provisional tic disorder or other specified or unspecified tic disorder (Criterion E).', 'Tics are common in childhood but transient in most cases. The estimated prevalence of Tourette’s disorder ranges from 3 to 8 per 1,000 in school-age children. Males are more commonly affected than females, with the ratio varying from 2:1 to 4:1(Knight et al. 2012). A national survey in the United States estimated 3 per 1,000 for the prevalence of clinically identified cases(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009). The frequency of identified cases was lower among African Americans and Hispanic Americans, which may be related to differences in access to care.', 'Onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. Peak severity occurs between ages 10 and 12 years, with a decline in severity during adolescence. Many adults with tic disorders experience diminished symptoms. A small percentage of individuals will have persistently severe or worsening symptoms in adulthood(Bloch and Leckman 2009).', 'Tic symptoms manifest similarly in all age groups and across the lifespan. Tics wax and wane in severity and change in affected muscle groups and vocalizations over time. As children get older, they begin to report their tics being associated with a premonitory urge—a somatic sensation that precedes the tic—and a feeling of tension reduction following the expression of the tic(Leckman et al. 1993). Tics associated with a premonitory urge may be experienced as not completely “involuntary” in that the urge and the tic can be resisted. An individual may also feel the need to perform a tic in a specific way or repeat it until he or she achieves the feeling that the tic has been done “just right.”', 'The vulnerability toward developing co-occurring conditions changes as individuals pass through the age of risk for various co-occurring conditions. For example, prepubertal children with tic disorders are more likely to experience attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and separation anxiety disorder than are teenagers and adults, who are more likely to experience the new onset of major depressive disorder, substance use disorder, or bipolar disorder.', 'Tics are worsened by anxiety, excitement, and exhaustion and are better during calm, focused activities. Individuals may have fewer tics when engaged in schoolwork or tasks at work than when relaxing at home after school or in the evening. Stressful/exciting events (e.g., taking a test, participating in exciting activities) often make tics worse. ', 'Observing a gesture or sound in another person may result in an individual with a tic disorder making a similar gesture or sound, which may be incorrectly perceived by others as purposeful. This can be a particular problem when the individual is interacting with authority figures (e.g., teachers, supervisors, police).', "Genetic and environmental factors influence tic symptom expression and severity. Important risk alleles for Tourette’s disorder (O'Rourke et al. 2009) and rare genetic variants in families with tic disorders have been identified(Fernandez et al. 2012; O'Roak et al. 2010). Obstetrical complications, older paternal age, lower birth weight, and maternal smoking during pregnancy are associated with worse tic severity(Mathews et al. 2006).", 'Tic disorders do not appear to vary in clinical characteristics, course, or etiology by race, ethnicity, and culture. However, race, ethnicity, and culture may impact how tic disorders are perceived and managed in the family and community, as well as influencing patterns of help seeking, and choices of treatment(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009; Olfson et al. 2011).', 'Males are more commonly affected than females, but there are no gender differences in the kinds of tics, age at onset, or course. Women with persistent tic disorders may be more likely to experience anxiety and depression(Lewin et al. 2012).', 'Many individuals with mild to moderate tic severity experience no distress or impairment in functioning and may even be unaware of their tics. Individuals with more severe symptoms generally have more impairment in daily living, but even individuals with moderate or even severe tic disorders may function well. The presence of a co-occurring condition, such as ADHD or OCD, can have greater impact on functioning(Hassan and Cavanna 2012). Less commonly, tics disrupt functioning in daily activities and result in social isolation, interpersonal conflict, peer victimization, inability to work or to go to school, and lower quality of life(Conelea et al. 2011a; Conelea et al. 2011b). The individual also may experience substantial psychological distress. Rare complications of Tourette’s disorder include physical injury, such as eye injury (from hitting oneself in the face), and orthopedic and neurological injury (e.g., disc disease related to forceful head and neck movements)(Lehman et al. 2011).', 'Motor stereotypies are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive, predictable movements that appear purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function or purpose and stop with distraction(Singer 2011). Examples include repetitive hand waving/rotating, arm flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereotypies can be differentiated from tics based on the former’s earlier age at onset (younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to minutes), constant repetitive fixed form and location, exacerbation when engrossed in activities, lack of a premonitory urge, and cessation with distraction (e.g., name called or touched). Chorea represents rapid, random, continual, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable, nonstereotyped actions that are usually bilateral and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face, trunk, and limbs). The timing, direction, and distribution of movements vary from moment to moment, and movements usually worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dystonia is the simultaneous sustained contracture of both agonist and antagonist muscles, resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the body. Dystonic postures are often triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen during sleep(Sanger et al. 2010).', 'Paroxysmal dyskinesias usually occur as dystonic or choreoathetoid movements that are precipitated by voluntary movement or exertion and less commonly arise from normal background activity.', 'Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is often nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur during sleep. Myoclonus is differentiated from tics by its rapidity, lack of suppressibility, and absence of a premonitory urge.', 'Differentiating obsessive-compulsive behaviors from tics may be difficult. Clues favoring an obsessive-compulsive behavior include a cognitive-based drive (e.g., fear of contamination) and the need to perform the action in a particular fashion a certain number of times, equally on both sides of the body, or until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Impulse-control problems and other repetitive behaviors, including persistent hair pulling, skin picking, and nail biting, appear more goal directed and complex than tics(Stein et al. 2010).', "Many medical and psychiatric conditions have been described as co-occurring with tic disorders(O'Rourke et al. 2009), with ADHD and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders being particularly common. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms observed in tic disorder tend to be characterized by more aggressive symmetry and order symptoms and poorer response to pharmacotherapy with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Children with ADHD may demonstrate disruptive behavior, social immaturity, and learning difficulties that may interfere with academic progress and interpersonal relationships and lead to greater impairment than that caused by a tic disorder. Individuals with tic disorders can also have other movement disorders and other mental disorders, such as depressive, bipolar, or substance use disorders.", '']