['Delusional Disorder', 'The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.', 'Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.', 'Note: Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated with delusions of infestation).', 'Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not markedly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.', 'If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative to the duration of the delusional periods.', 'The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.', 'Specify whether:', 'Erotomanic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with the individual.', 'Grandiose type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is the conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having made some important discovery.', 'Jealous type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s delusion is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.', 'Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals.', 'Somatic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves bodily functions or sensations.', 'Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.', 'Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief cannot be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g., referential delusions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).', 'Specify if:', 'With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences (e.g., an individual’s belief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars).', 'Specify if:', 'The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder:', 'First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.', 'First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.', 'First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.', 'Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode', 'Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission', 'Multiple episodes, currently in full remission', 'Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods being very brief relative to the overall course.', 'Unspecified', 'Specify current severity:', 'Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)', 'Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.', 'In erotomanic type, the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with the individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status (e.g., a famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to contact the object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the delusion is the conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some important discovery. Less commonly, the individual may have the delusion of having a special relationship with a prominent individual or of being a prominent person (in which case the actual individual may be regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may have a religious content. In jealous type, the central theme of the delusion is that of an unfaithful partner. This belief is arrived at without due cause and is based on incorrect inferences supported by small bits of “evidence” (e.g., disarrayed clothing). The individual with the delusion usually confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to intervene in the imagined infidelity. In persecutory type, the central theme of the delusion involves the individual’s belief of being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by legal or legislative action. Individuals with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to violence against those they believe are hurting them. In somatic type, the central theme of the delusion involves bodily functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several forms. Most common is the belief that the individual emits a foul odor; that there is an infestation of insects on or in the skin; that there is an internal parasite; or that parts of the body are not functioning.', 'The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that persist for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if the individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A for schizophrenia (Criterion B). Apart from the direct impact of the delusions, impairments in psychosocial functioning may be more circumscribed than those seen in other psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood episodes occur concurrently with the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes is brief relative to the total duration of the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and are not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder (Criterion E).', 'In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.', 'Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional disorder (de Portugal et al. 2011; Kendler 1982; Kendler and Walsh 1995; Marneros et al. 2012). Individuals with delusional disorder may be able to factually describe that others view their beliefs as irrational but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be “factual insight” but no true insight). Many individuals develop irritable or dysphoric mood, which can usually be understood as a reaction to their delusional beliefs(de Portugal et al. 2008). Anger and violent behavior can occur with persecutory, jealous, and erotomanic types. The individual may engage in litigious or antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of protest to the government). Legal difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and erotomanic types.', 'The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2%(Perälä et al. 2007), and the most frequent subtype is persecutory(de Portugal et al. 2010). Delusional disorder, jealous type, is probably more common in males than in females, but there are no major gender differences in the overall frequency of delusional disorder (de Portugal et al. 2010; Kendler 1982; Marneros et al. 2012; Wustmann et al. 2011).', 'On average, global function is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia (de Portugal et al. 2008; de Portugal et al. 2010; de Portugal et al. 2011; Kendler 1982; Kendler and Walsh 1995; Marneros et al. 2012). Although the diagnosis is generally stable, a proportion of individuals go on to develop schizophrenia(Marneros et al. 2012; Salvatore et al. 2011). Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder (Kendler et al. 1993). Although it can occur in younger age groups, the condition may be more prevalent in older individuals(de Portugal et al. 2010; Kendler 1982; Marneros et al. 2012; Wustmann et al. 2011).', 'An individual’s cultural and religious background must be taken into account in evaluating the possible presence of delusional disorder. The content of delusions also varies across cultural contexts.', 'The functional impairment is usually more circumscribed than that seen with other psychotic disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include poor occupational functioning and social isolation(de Portugal et al. 2008; de Portugal et al. 2011; Kendler and Walsh 1995; Marneros et al. 2012). When poor psychosocial functioning is present, delusional beliefs themselves often play a significant role. A common characteristic of individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior and appearance when their delusional ideas are not being discussed or acted on. ', 'If an individual with obsessive-compulsive disorder is completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder. Similarly, if an individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that his or her body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder, with absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder. ', 'Individuals with these disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder. For example, simple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder would be diagnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance. A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptomatology to delusional disorder but can be distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the delusional beliefs.', 'Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other characteristic symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. ', 'These disorders may be distinguished from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood episodes, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. Mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder (de Portugal et al. 2011). Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.', '']