['Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition', '', '', '    A prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally increased activity or energy that predominates in the clinical picture.', '', '    There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.', '', '    The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.', '', '    The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.', '', '    The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.', '', 'Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).', 'Specify if:', '', 'With manic features: Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic episode.', '', 'With manic- or hypomanic-like episode: Full criteria are met except Criterion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.', '', 'With mixed features: Symptoms of depression are also present but do not predominate in the clinical picture.', '', 'Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 242.90 [E05.90] hyperthyroidism; 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic features).', 'The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical picture that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the manic or hypomanic picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition (i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical conditions that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanic picture. Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diagnosed when the manic or hypomanic episodes definitely preceded the medical condition, since the proper diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance in which all preceding manic or hypomanic episodes—or, when only one such episode has occurred, the preceding manic or hypomanic episode—were associated with ingestion of a substance/medication). The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition should not be made during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The manic or hypomanic episode in bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning to qualify for this diagnosis (Criterion E).Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical evidence) is the key variable in this etiologically specified form of bipolar disorder. The listing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis. Among the best known of the medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic condition are Cushing’s disease(Cohen 1980; Haskett 1985; Kelly et al. 1983; Starkman et al. 1981) and multiple sclerosis(Joffe et al. 1987; Schiffer et al. 1986), as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries(Jorge et al. 1993; Mustafa et al. 2005; Robinson et al. 1988; Starkstein et al. 1991). Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition usually has its onset acutely or subacutely within the first weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical condition. However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associated medical condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanic syndrome. The clinician must make a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical condition is causative, based on temporal sequence as well as plausibility of a causal relationship. Finally, the condition may remit before or just after the medical condition remits, particularly when treatment of the manic/hypomanic symptoms is effective. Culture-related differences, to the extent that there is any evidence, pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around the world based on dietary, genetic factors, and other environmental factors).Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in middle-age males compared with females).Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated with manic or depressive syndromes; laboratory tests confirming the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis).Functional consequences of the bipolar symptoms may exacerbate impairments associated with the medical condition and may incur worse outcomes due to interference with medical treatment. In general, it is believed, but not established, that the illness, when induced by Cushing’s disease, will not recur if the Cushing’s disease is cured or arrested. However, it is also suggested, but not established, that mood syndromes, including depressive and manic/hypomanic ones, may be episodic (i.e., recurring) with static brain injuries and other central nervous system diseases.', 'Symptoms of delirium, catatonia, and acute anxiety', '', 'It is important to differentiate symptoms of mania from excited or hypervigilant delirious symptoms; from excited catatonic symptoms; and from agitation related to acute anxiety states.', 'Medication-induced depressive or manic symptoms', '', 'An important differential diagnostic observation is that the other medical condition may be treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment using all of the evidence in hand is the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a substance/medication-induced syndrome). The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual.', 'Conditions comorbid with bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing’s disease.', '']