['Speech Sound Disorder', 'Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes with speech intelligibility or prevents verbal communication of messages.The disturbance causes limitations in effective communication that interfere with social participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance, individually or in any combination.Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.', 'The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired conditions, such as cerebral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, or other medical or neurological conditions.Speech sound production describes the clear articulation of the phonemes (i.e., individual sounds) that in combination make up spoken words. Speech sound production requires both the phonological knowledge of speech sounds and the ability to coordinate the movements of the articulators (i.e., the jaw, tongue, and lips,) with breathing and vocalizing for speech. Children with speech production difficulties may experience difficulty with phonological knowledge of speech sounds or the ability to coordinate movements for speech in varying degrees. Speech sound disorder is thus heterogeneous in its underlying mechanisms and includes phonological disorder and articulation disorder. A speech sound disorder is diagnosed when speech sound production is not what would be expected based on the child’s age and developmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical, structural, neurological, or hearing impairment. Among typically developing children at age 4 years, overall speech should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be understandable.Language disorder, particularly expressive deficits, may be found to co-occur with speech sound disorder (Shriberg et al. 1999). A positive family history of speech or language disorders is often present.If the ability to rapidly coordinate the articulators is a particular aspect of difficulty, there may be a history of delay or incoordination in acquiring skills that also utilize the articulators and related facial musculature; among others, these skills include chewing, maintaining mouth closure, and blowing the nose. Other areas of motor coordination may be impaired as in developmental coordination disorder. Verbal dyspraxia is a term also used for speech production problems.Speech may be differentially impaired in certain genetic conditions (e.g., Down syndrome, 22q deletion, FoxP2 gene mutation). If present, these should also be coded.Learning to produce speech sounds clearly and accurately and learning to produce connected speech fluently are developmental skills. Articulation of speech sounds follows a developmental pattern, which is reflected in the age norms of standardized tests. It is not unusual for typically developing children to use developmental processes for shortening words and syllables as they are learning to talk, but their progression in mastering speech sound production should result in mostly intelligible speech by age 3 years.Children with speech sound disorder continue to use immature phonological simplification processes past the age when most children can produce words clearly.Most speech sounds should be produced clearly and most words should be pronounced accurately according to age and community norms by age 7 years(Shriberg et al. 1997). The most frequently misarticulated sounds also tend to be learned later, leading them to be called the “late eight” (l, r, s, z, th, ch, dzh, and zh)(Shriberg 1993). Misarticulation of any of these sounds by itself could be considered within normal limits up to age 8 years. When multiple sounds are involved, it may be appropriate to target some of those sounds as part of a plan to improve intelligibility prior to the age at which almost all children can produce them accurately. Lisping (i.e., misarticulating sibilants) is particularly common and may involve frontal or lateral patterns of airstream direction. It may be associated with an abnormal tongue-thrust swallowing pattern.Most children with speech sound disorder respond well to treatment, and speech difficulties improve over time, and thus the disorder may not be lifelong(Shriberg et al. 1999). However, when a language disorder is also present, the speech disorder has a poorer prognosis and may be associated with specific learning disorders.Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of speech should be considered before making the diagnosis.Hearing impairment or deafness may result in abnormalities of speech. Deficits of speech sound production may be associated with a hearing impairment, other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When speech deficits are in excess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of speech sound disorder may be made.Speech impairment may be due to structural deficits (e.g., cleft palate).Speech impairment may be attributable to a motor disorder, such as cerebral palsy. Neurological signs, as well as distinctive features of voice, differentiate dysarthria from speech sound disorder, although in young children (under 3 years) differentiation may be difficult, particularly when there is no or minimal general body motor involvement (as in, e.g., Worster-Drought syndrome).Limited use of speech may be a sign of selective mutism, an anxiety disorder that is characterized by a lack of speech in one or more contexts or settings. Selective mutism may develop in children with a speech disorder because of embarrassment about their impairments, but many children with selective mutism exhibit normal speech in “safe” settings, such as at home or with close friends(Bögels et al. 2010). ', '']