['Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition', '', '', '    A prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture.', '', '    There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.', '', '    The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious medical condition).', '', '    The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.', '', '    The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '', 'Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for depressive disorder due to another medical condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).', 'Specify if:', 'With depressive features: Full criteria are not met for a major depressive episode.', 'With major depressive–like episode: Full criteria are met (except Criterion C) for a major depressive episode.', 'With mixed features: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also present but do not predominate in the clinical picture.', 'Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F06.31] depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 244.9 [E03.9] hypothyroidism; 293.83 [F06.31] depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive features).', 'The essential feature of depressive disorder due to another medical condition is a prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture (Criterion A) and that is thought to be related to the direct physiological effects of another medical condition (Criterion B). In determining whether the mood disturbance is due to a general medical condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the mood disturbance is etiologically related to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the mood disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical condition and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of primary Mood Disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course or absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the development of mood symptoms can provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation.', '', 'Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical evidence) is the key variable in depressive disorder due to another medical condition. The listing of the medical conditions that are said to be able to induce major depression is never complete, and the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis.', '', 'There are clear associations, as well as some neuroanatomical correlates, of depression with stroke, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and traumatic brain injury(Jorge et al. 2004; Levin et al. 2005). Among the neuroendocrine conditions most closely associated with depression are Cushing’s disease(Cohen 1980; Haskett 1985; Starkman et al. 1981) and hypothyroidism. There are numerous other conditions thought to be associated with depression, such as multiple sclerosis(Sadovnick et al. 1996; Siegert and Abernethy 2005). However, the literature’s support for a causal association is greater with some conditions, such as Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease, than with others, for which the differential diagnosis may be adjustment disorder, with depressed mood.', 'Following stroke, the onset of depression appears to be very acute, occurring within 1 day or a few days of the cerebrovascular accident (CVA) in the largest case series(Robinson 1997; Robinson and Starkstein 1997). However, in some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to months following the CVA. In the largest series, the duration of the major depressive episode following stroke was 9–11 months on average. Similarly, in Huntington’s disease the depressive state comes quite early in the course of the illness. With Parkinson’s disease(Klepac et al. 2010) and Huntington’s disease(Pflanz et al. 1991), it often precedes the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments associated with each condition. This is more prominently the case for Huntington’s disease, in which depression is considered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some observational evidence that depression is less common as the dementia of Huntington’s disease progresses(Folstein et al. 1983; Paulsen et al. 2005). The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a week of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk associated with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal lesions in those individuals who present within days of the stroke(Robinson et al. 1984). The association with frontal regions and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2–6 months following stroke.Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in middle-age males compared with females).Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated with manic or depressive syndromes).There are no epidemiological studies that provide evidence to differentiate the risk of suicide from a major depressive episode due to another medical condition compared with the risk from a major depressive episode in general. There are case reports of suicides in association with major depressive episodes associated with another medical condition. There is a clear association between serious medical illnesses and suicide, particularly shortly after onset or diagnosis of the illness. Thus, it would be prudent to assume that the risk of suicide for major depressive episodes associated with medical conditions is not less than that for other forms of major depressive episode, and might even be greater.Functional consequences pertain to those associated with the medical condition. In general, it is believed, but not established, that a major depressive episode induced by Cushing’s disease will not recur if the Cushing’s disease is cured or arrested. However, it is also suggested, but not established, that mood syndromes, including depressive and manic/hypomanic ones, may be episodic (i.e., recurring) in some individuals with static brain injuries and other central nervous system diseases.', 'Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition', '', 'Determination of whether a medical condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset or worsening of the medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical disorder is effectively treated or remits.', 'Medication-induced depressive disorder', '', 'An important caveat is that some medical conditions are treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).', 'Adjustment disorders', '', 'It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major differentiating elements are the pervasiveness the depressive picture and the number and quality of the depressive symptoms that the patient reports or demonstrates on the mental status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual.', 'Conditions comorbid with depressive disorder due to another medical condition are those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. It has been noted that delirium can occur before or along with depressive symptoms in individuals with a variety of medical conditions, such as Cushing’s disease. The association of anxiety symptoms, usually generalized symptoms, is common in depressive disorders, regardless of cause.', '']