['Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)', 'Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are inappropriate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and are characterized by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the following:Sound and syllable repetitions.Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels.Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words).Words produced with an excess of physical tension.Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”).The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective communication, social participation, or academic or occupational performance, individually or in any combination.The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. (Note: Later-onset cases are diagnosed as 307.0 [F98.5] adult-onset fluency disorder.)The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-motor or sensory deficit, dysfluency associated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder.The essential feature of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is a disturbance in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual’s age. This disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds or syllables and by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g., pauses within a word), audible or silent blocking (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech), circumlocutions (i.e., word substitutions to avoid problematic words), words produced with an excess of physical tension, and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”). The disturbance in fluency interferes with academic or occupational achievement or with social communication. The extent of the disturbance varies from situation to situation and often is more severe when there is special pressure to communicate (e.g., giving a report at school, interviewing for a job). Dysfluency is often absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.Fearful anticipation of the problem may develop. The speaker may attempt to avoid dysfluencies by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., altering the rate of speech, avoiding certain words or sounds) or by avoiding certain speech situations, such as telephoning or public speaking. In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety have been shown to exacerbate dysfluency.Childhood-onset fluency disorder may also be accompanied by motor movements (e.g., eye blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements, fist clenching). Children with fluency disorder show a range of language abilities, and the relationship between fluency disorder and language abilities is unclear(Watkins and Johnson 2004).Childhood-onset fluency disorder, or developmental stuttering, occurs by age 6 for 80%–90% of affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years(Månsson 2000). The onset can be insidious or more sudden. Typically, dysfluencies start gradually, with repetition of initial consonants, first words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysfluencies. As the disorder progresses, the dysfluencies become more frequent and interfering, occurring on the most meaningful words or phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes aware of the speech difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the dysfluencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of short and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%–85% of children recover from the dysfluency(Månsson 2000; Yairi and Ambrose 1999), with severity of fluency disorder at age 8 years predicting recovery or persistence into adolescence and beyond(Howell and Davis 2011).', 'The risk of stuttering among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with childhood-onset fluency disorder is more than three times the risk in the general population.In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety can exacerbate dysfluency. Impairment of social functioning may result from this anxiety.Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment or other sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in excess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be made.The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies that occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase repetitions (e.g., “I want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled pauses, and parenthetical remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity as the child grows older, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder is appropriate.Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be detected by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an “adult-onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysfluencies are associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions and mental disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis.Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder should be distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder by their nature and timing. ', '']