['Selective Mutism', '    Consistent failure to speak in specific social situations in which there is an expectation for speaking (e.g., at school) despite speaking in other situations.', '', '    The disturbance interferes with educational or occupational achievement or with social communication.', '', '    The duration of the disturbance is at least 1 month (not limited to the first month of school).', '', '    The failure to speak is not attributable to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort with, the spoken language required in the social situation.', '', '    The disturbance is not better explained by a communication disorder (e.g., childhood-onset fluency disorder) and does not occur exclusively during the course of autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, or another psychotic disorder.', 'When encountering other individuals in social interactions, children with selective mutism do not initiate speech or reciprocally respond when spoken to by others. Lack of speech occurs in social interactions with children or adults. Children with selective mutism will speak in their home in the presence of immediate family members but often not even in front of close friends or second-degree relatives, such as grandparents or cousins. The disturbance is often marked by high social anxiety(Viana et al. 2009). Children with selective mutism often refuse to speak at school, leading to academic or educational impairment, as teachers often find it difficult to assess skills such as reading. The lack of speech may interfere with social communication, although children with this disorder sometimes use nonspoken or nonverbal means (e.g., grunting, pointing, writing) to communicate and may be willing or eager to perform or engage in social encounters when speech is not required (e.g., nonverbal parts in school plays). Associated features of selective mutism may include excessive shyness, fear of social embarrassment, social isolation and withdrawal(Carbone et al. 2010; Cohan et al. 2008), clinging, compulsive traits, negativism, temper tantrums, or mild oppositional behavior(Cohan et al. 2008). Although children with this disorder generally have normal language skills, there may occasionally be an associated communication disorder, although no particular association with a specific communication disorder has been identified(Manassis et al. 2007). Even when these disorders are present, anxiety is present as well(Cohan et al. 2008). In clinical settings, children with selective mutism are almost always given an additional diagnosis of another anxiety disorder—most commonly, social anxiety disorder (social phobia) (Viana et al. 2009).Selective mutism is a relatively rare disorder and has not been included as a diagnostic category in epidemiological studies of prevalence of childhood disorders. Point prevalence using various clinic or school samples ranges between 0.03% and 1% depending on the setting (e.g., clinic vs. school vs. general population) and ages of the individuals in the sample(Carbone et al. 2010; Viana et al. 2009). The prevalence of the disorder does not seem to vary by sex or race/ethnicity. The disorder is more likely to manifest in young children than in adolescents and adults.', 'The onset of selective mutism is usually before age 5 years, but the disturbance may not come to clinical attention until entry into school, where there is an increase in social interaction and performance tasks, such as reading aloud(Viana et al. 2009). The persistence of the disorder is variable. Although clinical reports suggest that many individuals “outgrow” selective mutism, the longitudinal course of the disorder is unknown. In some cases, particularly in individuals with social anxiety disorder, selective mutism may disappear, but symptoms of social anxiety disorder remain.', 'Temperamental', '', 'Temperamental risk factors for selective mutism are not well identified. Negative affectivity (neuroticism) or behavioral inhibition may play a role, as may parental history of shyness, social isolation, and social anxiety(Chavira et al. 2007; Viana et al. 2009). Children with selective mutism may have subtle receptive language difficulties compared with their peers, although receptive language is still within the normal range(Nowakowski et al. 2009).', 'Environmental', '', 'Social inhibition on the part of parents may serve as a model for social reticence and selective mutism in children. Furthermore, parents of children with selective mutism have been described as overprotective(Remschmidt et al. 2001) or more controlling than parents of children with other anxiety disorders or no disorder(Edison et al. 2011).', 'Genetic and physiological factors', '', 'Because of the significant overlap between selective mutism and social anxiety disorder, there may be shared genetic factors between these conditions.', 'Children in families who have immigrated to a country where a different language is spoken may refuse to speak the new language because of lack of knowledge of the language. If comprehension of the new language is adequate but refusal to speak persists, a diagnosis of selective mutism may be warranted.', 'Selective mutism may result in social impairment, as children may be too anxious to engage in reciprocal social interaction with other children. As children with selective mutism mature, they may face increasing social isolation. In school settings, these children may suffer academic impairment, because often they do not communicate with teachers regarding their academic or personal needs (e.g., not understanding a class assignment, not asking to use the restroom). Severe impairment in school and social functioning, including that resulting from teasing by peers, is common. In certain instances, selective mutism may serve as a compensatory strategy to decrease anxious arousal in social encounters(Carbone et al. 2010; Viana et al. 2009).', 'Communication disorders', '', 'Selective mutism should be distinguished from speech disturbances that are better explained by a communication disorder, such as language disorder, speech sound disorder (previously phonological disorder), childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering), or pragmatic (social) communication disorder. Unlike selective mutism, the speech disturbance in these conditions is not restricted to a specific social situation.', 'Neurodevelopmental disorders and schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders', '', 'Individuals with an autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder, or severe intellectual disability may have problems in social communication and be unable to speak appropriately in social situations. In contrast, selective mutism should be diagnosed only when a child has an established capacity to speak in some social situations (e.g., typically at home).', 'Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)', '', 'The social anxiety and social avoidance in social anxiety disorder may be associated with selective mutism. In such cases, both diagnoses may be given.', 'The most common comorbid conditions are other anxiety disorders, most commonly social anxiety disorder, followed by separation anxiety disorder and specific phobia (Viana et al. 2009). Oppositional behaviors have been noted to occur in children with selective mutism, although oppositional behavior may be limited to situations requiring speech(Cohan et al. 2008). Communication delays or disorders also may appear in some children with selective mutism(Manassis et al. 2007).', '', '']