['Anxiety Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition', '    Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.', '    There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.', '    The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.', '    The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.', '    The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', 'Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition within the name of the mental disorder (e.g., 293.84 [F06.4] anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the anxiety disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 227.0 [D35.00] pheochromocytoma; 293.84 [F06.4] anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma.', 'The essential feature of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is clinically significant anxiety that is judged to be best explained as a physiological effect of another medical condition. Symptoms can include prominent anxiety symptoms or panic attacks (Criterion A). The judgment that the symptoms are best explained by the associated physical condition must be based on evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B). Additionally, it must be judged that the symptoms are not better accounted for by another mental disorder, in particular, adjustment disorder, with anxiety, in which the stressor is the medical condition (Criterion C). In this case, an individual with adjustment disorder is especially distressed about the meaning or the consequences of the associated medical condition. By contrast, there is often a prominent physical component to the anxiety (e.g., shortness of breath) when the anxiety is due to another medical condition. The diagnosis is not made if the anxiety symptoms occur only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The anxiety symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).', 'In determining whether the anxiety symptoms are attributable to another medical condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of the medical condition. Furthermore, it must be established that anxiety symptoms can be etiologically related to the medical condition through a physiological mechanism before making a judgment that this is the best explanation for the symptoms in a specific individual. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Several aspects of the clinical presentation should be considered: 1) the presence of a clear temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical condition and the anxiety symptoms; 2) the presence of features that are atypical of a primary anxiety disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course); and 3) evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., hyperthyroidism) causes anxiety. In addition, the disturbance must not be better explained by a primary anxiety disorder, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, or another primary mental disorder (e.g., adjustment disorder).', 'A number of medical conditions are known to include anxiety as a symptomatic manifestation. Examples include endocrine disease (e.g., hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma, hypoglycemia, hyperadrenocortisolism), cardiovascular disorders (e.g., congestive heart failure, pulmonary embolism, arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation), respiratory illness (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, pneumonia), metabolic disturbances (e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency, porphyria), and neurological illness (e.g., neoplasms, vestibular dysfunction, encephalitis, seizure disorders). Anxiety due to another medical condition is diagnosed when the medical condition is known to induce anxiety and when the medical condition preceded the onset of the anxiety.The prevalence of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is unclear. There appears to be an elevated prevalence of anxiety disorders among individuals with a variety of medical conditions, including asthma, hypertension, ulcers, and arthritis(Kessler et al. 2003). However, this increased prevalence may be due to reasons other than the anxiety disorder directly causing the medical condition. The development and course of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition generally follows the course of the underlying illness. This diagnosis is not meant to include primary anxiety disorders that arise in the context of chronic medical illness. This is important to consider with older adults, who may experience chronic medical illness and then develop independent anxiety disorders secondary to the chronic medical illness.Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of the associated medical condition.', 'Delirium', 'A separate diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the anxiety disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) if the etiology of anxiety is judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder and if anxiety is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.', 'Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety)', 'If the presentation includes a mix of different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder due to another medical condition depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.', 'Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder', 'If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder should be considered. Certain medications are known to increase anxiety (e.g., corticosteroids, estrogens, metoclopramide), and when this is the case, the medication may be the most likely etiology, although it may be difficult to distinguish whether the anxiety is attributable to the medications or to the medical illness itself. When a diagnosis of substance-induced anxiety is being made in relation to recreational or nonprescribed drugs, it may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used. If the disturbance is associated with both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder) can be given. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.', 'Anxiety disorder (not due to a known medical condition)', 'Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished from other anxiety disorders (especially panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder). In other anxiety disorders, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with another medical condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset, atypical symptoms, and the absence of a personal or family history of anxiety disorders suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition. Anxiety disorders can exacerbate or pose increased risk for medical conditions such as cardiovascular events and myocardial infarction and should not be diagnosed as anxiety disorder due to another medical condition in these cases(Chen et al. 2009; Martens et al. 2010; Scherrer et al. 2010).', 'Illness anxiety disorder', 'Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished from illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by worry about illness, concern about pain, and bodily preoccupations. In the case of illness anxiety disorder, individuals may or may not have diagnosed medical conditions. Although an individual with illness anxiety disorder and a diagnosed medical condition is likely to experience anxiety about the medical condition, the medical condition is not physiologically related to the anxiety symptoms.', 'Adjustment disorders', 'Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished from adjustment disorders, with anxiety, or with anxiety and depressed mood. Adjustment disorder is warranted when individuals experience a maladaptive response to the stress of having another medical condition. The reaction to stress usually concerns the meaning or consequences of the stress, as compared with the experience of anxiety or mood symptoms that occur as a physiological consequence of the other medical condition. In adjustment disorder, the anxiety symptoms are typically related to coping with the stress of having a general medical condition, whereas in anxiety disorder due to another medical condition, individuals are more likely to have prominent physical symptoms and to be focused on issues other than the stress of the illness itself.', 'Associated feature of another mental disorder', 'Anxiety symptoms may be an associated feature of another mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa).', 'Other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder', 'This diagnosis is given if it cannot be determined whether the anxiety symptoms are primary, substance-induced, or associated with another medical condition.', '', '']