['Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder', '    Recurrent skin picking resulting in skin lesions.', '    Repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.', '    The skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '    The skin picking is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., scabies).', '    The skin picking is not better explained by symptoms of another mental disorder (e.g., delusions or tactile hallucinations in a psychotic disorder, attempts to improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in body dysmorphic disorder, stereotypies in stereotypic movement disorder, or intention to harm oneself in nonsuicidal self-injury).', 'The essential feature of excoriation (skin-picking) disorder is recurrent picking at one’s own skin (Criterion A). The most commonly picked sites are the face, arms, and hands, but many individuals pick from multiple body sites. Individuals may pick at healthy skin, at minor skin irregularities, at lesions such as pimples or calluses, or at scabs from previous picking. Most individuals pick with their fingernails, although many use tweezers, pins, or other objects(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Tucker et al. 2011). In addition to skin picking, there may be skin rubbing, squeezing, lancing, and biting(Tucker et al. 2011). Individuals with excoriation disorder often spend significant amounts of time on their picking behavior, sometimes several hours per day, and such skin picking may endure for months or years(Grant and Odlaug 2009). Criterion A requires that skin picking lead to skin lesions, although individuals with this disorder often attempt to conceal or camouflage such lesions (e.g., with makeup or clothing). Individuals with excoriation disorder have made repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking (Criterion B)(Lochner et al. 2012).', '', 'Criterion C indicates that skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. The term distress includes negative affects that may be experienced by individuals with skin picking, such as feeling a loss of control, embarrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in several different areas of functioning (e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part because of avoidance of social situations(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Tucker et al. 2011).', 'Skin picking may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving skin or scabs(Grant and Odlaug 2009). Thus, individuals may search for a particular kind of scab to pull, and they may examine, play with, or mouth or swallow the skin after it has been pulled. Skin picking may also be preceded or accompanied by various emotional states(Simeon et al. 1997; Snorrason et al. 2010). Skin picking may be triggered by feelings of anxiety or boredom, may be preceded by an increasing sense of tension (either immediately before picking the skin or when attempting to resist the urge to pick), and may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the skin or scab has been picked(Arnold et al. 2001; Wilhelm et al. 1999). Some individuals report picking in response to a minor skin irregularity or to relieve an uncomfortable bodily sensation. Pain is not routinely reported to accompany skin picking(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Woods et al. 2006). Some individuals engage in skin picking that is more focused (i.e., with preceding tension and subsequent relief), whereas others engage in more automatic picking (i.e., when skin picking occurs without preceding tension and without full awareness), and many have a mix of both behavioral styles(Walther et al. 2009). Skin picking does not usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except immediate family members. Some individuals report picking the skin of others.In the general population, the lifetime prevalence for excoriation disorder in adults is 1.4%(Keuthen et al. 2010) or somewhat higher(Grant et al. 2012; Stein et al. 2010). Three-quarters or more of individuals with the disorder are female(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Keuthen et al. 2001). This likely reflects the true gender ratio of the condition, although it may also reflect differential treatment seeking based on gender or cultural attitudes regarding appearance.Although individuals with excoriation disorder may present at various ages, the skin picking most often has onset during adolescence, commonly coinciding with or following the onset of puberty. The disorder frequently begins with a dermatological condition, such as acne(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Vythilingum and Stein 2005). Sites of skin picking may vary over time. The usual course is chronic, with some waxing and waning if untreated. For some individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a time.', 'Genetic and physiological', '', 'Excoriation disorder is more common in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and their first-degree family members than in the general population(Bienvenu et al. 2012).', 'Most individuals with excoriation disorder admit to skin picking; therefore, dermatopathological diagnosis is rarely required. However, the disorder may have characteristic features on histopathology(van Dijk and van Voorst Vader 1979). ', 'Excoriation disorder is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational impairment(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Tucker et al. 2011). The majority of individuals with this condition spend at least 1 hour per day picking, thinking about picking, and resisting urges to pick. Many individuals report avoiding social or entertainment events as well as going out in public. A majority of individuals with the disorder also report experiencing work interference from skin picking on at least a daily or weekly basis. A significant proportion of students with excoriation disorder report having missed school, having experienced difficulties managing responsibilities at school, or having had difficulties studying because of skin picking. Medical complications of skin picking include tissue damage, scarring, and infection and can be life-threatening(Odlaug and Grant 2008). Rarely, synovitis of the wrists due to chronic picking has been reported(Simeon et al. 1997). Skin picking often results in significant tissue damage and scarring. It frequently requires antibiotic treatment for infection, and on occasion it may require surgery(Odlaug and Grant 2008).', 'Psychotic disorder', '', 'Skin picking may occur in response to a delusion (i.e., parasitosis) or tactile hallucination (i.e., formication) in a psychotic disorder. In such cases, excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed.', 'Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders', '', 'Excessive washing compulsions in response to contamination obsessions in individuals with OCD may lead to skin lesions, and skin picking may occur in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder who pick their skin solely because of appearance concerns; in such cases, excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. The description of body-focused repetitive behavior disorder in other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder excludes individuals whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for excoriation disorder.', 'Neurodevelopmental disorders', '', 'While stereotypic movement disorder may be characterized by repetitive self-injurious behavior, onset is in the early developmental period. For example, individuals with the neurogenetic condition Prader-Willi syndrome may have early onset of skin picking, and their symptoms may meet criteria for stereotypic movement disorder. While tics in individuals with Tourette’s disorder may lead to self-injury, the behavior is not tic-like in excoriation disorder.', 'Somatic symptom and related disorders', '', 'Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin lesion is primarily attributable to deceptive behaviors in factitious disorder.', 'Other disorders', '', 'Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily attributable to the intention to harm oneself that is characteristic of nonsuicidal self-injury.', 'Other medical conditions', '', 'Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily attributable to another medical condition. For example, scabies is a dermatological condition invariably associated with severe itching and scratching. However, excoriation disorder may be precipitated or exacerbated by an underlying dermatological condition. For example, acne may lead to some scratching and picking, which may also be associated with comorbid excoriation disorder. The differentiation between these two clinical situations (acne with some scratching and picking vs. acne with comorbid excoriation disorder) requires an assessment of the extent to which the individual’s skin picking has become independent of the underlying dermatological condition.', 'Substance/medication-induced disorders', '', 'Skin-picking symptoms may also be induced by certain substances (e.g., cocaine), in which case excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. If such skin picking is clinically significant, then a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should be considered.', 'Excoriation disorder is often accompanied by other mental disorders(Grant and Odlaug 2009; Stein et al. 2010). Such disorders include OCD and trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), as well as major depressive disorder (Odlaug and Grant 2008; Wilhelm et al. 1999). Repetitive body-focused symptoms other than skin picking and hair pulling (e.g., nail biting) occur in many individuals with excoriation disorder and may deserve an additional diagnosis of other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., body-focused repetitive behavior disorder) (Odlaug and Grant 2008).', '', '']