['Dissociative Amnesia', 'An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.', 'Note: Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia for a specific event or events; or generalized amnesia for identity and life history.', 'The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', 'The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., alcohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other medical condition (e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia, sequelae of a closed head injury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological condition).', 'The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative identity disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder, or major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', 'Coding note: The code for dissociative amnesia without dissociative fugue is 300.12 (F44.0). The code for dissociative amnesia with dissociative fugue is 300.13 (F44.1).', 'Specify if:', '300.13 (F44.1) With dissociative fugue: Apparently purposeful travel or bewildered wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or for other important autobiographical information.', '', 'The defining characteristic of dissociative amnesia is an inability to recall important autobiographical information that 1) should be successfully stored in memory and 2) ordinarily would be readily remembered (Criterion A). Dissociative amnesia differs from the permanent amnesias due to neurobiological damage or toxicity that prevent memory storage or retrieval in that it is always potentially reversible because the memory has been successfully stored(Spiegel et al. 2011).', '', 'Localized amnesia, a failure to recall events during a circumscribed period of time, is the most common form of dissociative amnesia (Spiegel et al. 2011). Localized amnesia may be broader than amnesia for a single traumatic event (e.g., months or years associated with child abuse or intense combat)(Edwards et al. 2001). In selective amnesia, the individual can recall some, but not all, of the events during a circumscribed period of time. Thus, the individual may remember part of a traumatic event but not other parts. Some individuals report both localized and selective amnesias.', '', 'Generalized amnesia, a complete loss of memory for one’s life history, is rare. Individuals with generalized amnesia may forget personal identity(Loewenstein 1996). Some lose previous knowledge about the world (i.e., semantic knowledge) and can no longer access well-learned skills (i.e., procedural knowledge). Generalized amnesia has an acute onset; the perplexity, disorientation, and purposeless wandering of individuals with generalized amnesia usually bring them to the attention of the police or psychiatric emergency services. Generalized amnesia may be more common among combat veterans, sexual assault victims, and individuals experiencing extreme emotional stress or conflict(Kaszniak et al. 1988; Sargent and Slater 1941; Witztum et al. 2002).', '', 'Individuals with dissociative amnesia are frequently unaware (or only partially aware) of their memory problems. Many, especially those with localized amnesia, minimize the importance of their memory loss and may become uncomfortable when prompted to address it(Loewenstein 2001). In systematized amnesia, the individual loses memory for a specific category of information (e.g., all memories relating to one’s family, a particular person, or childhood sexual abuse). In continuous amnesia, an individual forgets each new event as it occurs.', 'Many individuals with dissociative amnesia are chronically impaired in their ability to form and sustain satisfactory relationships. Histories of trauma, child abuse, and victimization are common. Some individuals with dissociative amnesia report dissociative flashbacks (i.e., behavioral reexperiencing of traumatic events)(Loewenstein 1991). Many have a history of self-mutilation, suicide attempts, and other high-risk behaviors. Depressive and functional neurological symptoms are common, as are depersonalization, auto-hypnotic symptoms, and high hypnotizability. Sexual dysfunctions are common. Mild traumatic brain injury may precede dissociative amnesia (Kritchevsky et al. 2004). The 12-month prevalence for dissociative amnesia among adults in a small U.S. community study was 1.8% (1.0% for males; 2.6% for females)(Johnson et al. 2006). Onset of generalized amnesia is usually sudden. Less is known about the onset of localized and selective amnesias because these amnesias are seldom evident, even to the individual. Although overwhelming or intolerable events typically precede localized amnesia, its onset may be delayed for hours, days, or longer(Loewenstein 1991).Individuals may report multiple episodes of dissociative amnesia. A single episode may predispose to future episodes. In between episodes of amnesia, the individual may or may not appear to be acutely symptomatic. The duration of the forgotten events can range from minutes to decades. Some episodes of dissociative amnesia resolve rapidly (e.g., when the person is removed from combat or some other stressful situation), whereas other episodes persist for long periods of time. Some individuals may gradually recall the dissociated memories years later. Dissociative capacities may decline with age, but not always(Loewenstein 1991). As the amnesia remits, there may be considerable distress, suicidal behavior, and symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Dissociative amnesia has been observed in young children, adolescents, and adults(Putnam 1997). Children may be the most difficult to evaluate because they often have difficulty understanding questions about amnesia, and interviewers may find it difficult to formulate child-friendly questions about memory and amnesia. Observations of apparent dissociative amnesia are often difficult to differentiate from inattention, absorption, anxiety, oppositional behavior, and learning disorders. Reports from several different sources (e.g., teacher, therapist, case worker) may be needed to diagnose amnesia in children(Putnam 1997).', 'Environmental', '', 'Single or repeated traumatic experiences (e.g., war, childhood maltreatment, natural disaster, internment in concentration camps, genocide) are common antecedents(Dalenberg 2006; Dalenberg et al. 2012). Dissociative amnesia is more likely to occur with 1) a greater number of adverse childhood experiences, particularly physical and/or sexual abuse(Edwards et al. 2001), 2) interpersonal violence(Loewenstein 1991; Loewenstein 1996; Loewenstein 2001); and 3) increased severity, frequency, and violence of the trauma(Edwards et al. 2001; Loewenstein 1991; Loewenstein 1996; Loewenstein 2001).', 'Genetic and physiological', '', 'There are no genetic studies of dissociative amnesia. Studies of dissociation report significant genetic and environmental factors in both clinical and nonclinical samples(Becker-Blease et al. 2004; Jang et al. 1998; Lochner et al. 2007; Pieper et al. 2011; Savitz et al. 2008).', 'Course modifiers', '', 'Removal from the traumatic circumstances underlying the dissociative amnesia (e.g., combat) may bring about a rapid return of memory(Thom and Fenton 1920). The memory loss of individuals with dissociative fugue may be particularly refractory. Onset of PTSD symptoms may decrease localized, selective, or systematized amnesia. The returning memory, however, may be experienced as flashbacks that alternate with amnesia for the content of the flashbacks(van der Hart et al. 1993).', 'In Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America, non-epileptic seizures and other functional neurological symptoms may accompany dissociative amnesia. In cultures with highly restrictive social traditions, the precipitants of dissociative amnesia often do not involve frank trauma. Instead, the amnesia is preceded by severe psychological stresses or conflicts (e.g., marital conflict, other family disturbances, attachment problems, conflicts due to restriction or oppression). Suicidal and other self-destructive behaviors are common in individuals with dissociative amnesia. Suicidal behavior may be a particular risk when the amnesia remits suddenly and overwhelms the individual with intolerable memories(Coons and Millstein 1992; Gudjonsson and Haward 1982; Takahashi 1988).The impairment of individuals with localized, selective, or systematized dissociative amnesia ranges from limited to severe. Individuals with chronic generalized dissociative amnesia usually have impairment in all aspects of functioning. Even when these individuals “re-learn” aspects of their life history, autobiographical memory remains very impaired. Most become vocationally and interpersonally disabled(Kikuchi et al. 2010; Loewenstein 1996).', 'Dissociative identity disorder', '', 'Individuals with dissociative amnesia may report depersonalization and auto-hypnotic symptoms. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder report pervasive discontinuities in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many other dissociative symptoms. The amnesias of individuals with localized, selective, and/or systematized dissociative amnesias are relatively stable(Boon and Draijer 1993; Ross et al. 1990). Amnesias in dissociative identity disorder include amnesia for everyday events, finding of unexplained possessions, sudden fluctuations in skills and knowledge, major gaps in recall of life history, and brief amnesic gaps in interpersonal interactions(Boon and Draijer 1993; Ross et al. 1990).', 'Posttraumatic stress disorder', '', 'Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of a specific traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim with depersonalization and/or derealization symptoms who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape). When that amnesia extends beyond the immediate time of the trauma, a comorbid diagnosis of dissociative amnesia is warranted(Lanius et al. 2012).', 'Neurocognitive disorders', '', 'In neurocognitive disorders, memory loss for personal information is usually embedded in cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, and behavioral disturbances. In dissociative amnesia, memory deficits are primarily for autobiographical information; intellectual and cognitive abilities are preserved(Loewenstein 1991; Loewenstein 1996; Loewenstein 2001).', 'Substance-related disorders', '', 'In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or other substances/medications, there may be episodes of “black outs” or periods for which the individual has no memory. To aid in distinguishing these episodes from dissociative amnesia, a longitudinal history noting that the amnestic episodes occur only in the context of intoxication and do not occur in other situations would help identify the source as substance-induced; however the distinction may be difficult when the individual with dissociative amnesia may also misuse alcohol or other substances in the context of stressful situations that may also exacerbate dissociative symptoms. Some individuals with comorbid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will attribute their memory problems solely to the substance use(Loewenstein 2001). Prolonged use of alcohol or other substances may result in a substance-induced neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cognitive function, but in this context the protracted history of substance use and the persistent deficits associated with the neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it from dissociative amnesia, where there is typically no evidence of persistent impairment in intellectual functioning.', 'Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury', '', 'Amnesia may occur in the context of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) when there has been an impact to the head or other mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the brain within the skull TBI. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs (e.g., abnormalities on neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder, visual field cuts, anosmia). A neurocognitive disorder attributable to TBI must present either immediately after brain injury occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persist past the acute post-injury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder following TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive function, learning and memory as well as slowed speed of information processing and disturbances in social cognition. These additional features help distinguish it from dissociative amnesia.', 'Seizure disorders', '', 'Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior during seizures or post-ictally with subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder engage in nonpurposive wandering that is limited to the period of seizure activity. Conversely, behavior during a dissociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goal-directed and may last for days, weeks, or longer(Loewenstein 1991). Occasionally, individuals with a seizure disorder will report that earlier autobiographical memories have been “wiped out” as the seizure disorder progresses. Such memory loss is not associated with traumatic circumstances and appears to occur randomly. Serial electroencephalograms usually show abnormalities. Telemetric electroencephalographic monitoring usually shows an association between the episodes of amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociative and epileptic amnesias may coexist.', 'Catatonic stupor', '', 'Mutism in catatonic stupor may suggest dissociative amnesia, but failure of recall is absent. Other catatonic symptoms (e.g., rigidity, posturing, negativism) are usually present.', 'Factitious disorder and malingering', '', 'There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures that invariably distinguishes dissociative amnesia from feigned amnesia(Bourget and Whitehurst 2007; Bronks 1987;Schacter 1986). Individuals with factitious disorder or malingering have been noted to continue their deception even during hypnotic or barbiturate-facilitated interviews(Ruedrich et al. 1985). Feigned amnesia is more common in individuals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal problems; or 3) a wish to escape stressful circumstances. True amnesia can be associated with those same circumstances. Many individuals who malinger confess spontaneously or when confronted(Kopelman 1987; Parwatikar et al. 1985; Schacter 1986).', 'Normal and age-related changes in memory', '', 'Memory decrements in major and mild neurocognitive disorders differ from those of dissociative amnesia, which are usually associated with stressful events and are more specific, extensive, and/or complex.', '', 'As dissociative amnesia begins to remit, a wide variety of affective phenomena may surface: dysphoria, grief, rage, shame, guilt, psychological conflict and turmoil, and suicidal and homicidal ideation, impulses, and acts. These individuals may have symptoms that then meet diagnostic criteria for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia); major depressive disorder; other specified or unspecified depressive disorder; adjustment disorder, with depressed mood; or adjustment disorder, with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. Many individuals with dissociative amnesia develop PTSD at some point during their life, especially when the traumatic antecedents of their amnesia are brought into conscious awareness.', '', 'Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for a comorbid somatic symptom or related disorder (and vice versa), including somatic symptom disorder and conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder, especially dependent, avoidant, and borderline(Coons and Millstein 1992). ', '', '']