['Delirium', 'A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention) and awareness (reduced orientation to the environment).', 'The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few days), represents a change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in severity during the course of a day.', 'An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation, language, visuospatial ability, or perception).', 'The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another preexisting, established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.', 'There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to a medication), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.', 'Specify whether:', 'Substance intoxication delirium: This diagnosis should be made instead of substance intoxication when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.', 'Substance withdrawal delirium: This diagnosis should be made instead of substance withdrawal when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.Medication-induced delirium: This diagnosis applies when the symptoms in Criteria A and C arise as a side effect of a medication taken as prescribed. Delirium due to another medical condition: There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is attributable to the physiological consequences of another medical condition. Delirium due to multiple etiologies: There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the delirium has more than one etiology (e.g., more than one etiological medical condition; another medical condition plus substance intoxication or medication side effect).', 'Specify if:', 'Acute: Lasting a few hours or days.', 'Persistent: Lasting weeks or months.', 'Specify if:', 'Hyperactive: The individual has a hyperactive level of psychomotor activity that may be accompanied by mood lability, agitation, and/or refusal to cooperate with medical care.', 'Hypoactive: The individual has a hypoactive level of psychomotor activity that may be accompanied by sluggishness and lethargy that approaches stupor.', 'Mixed level of activity: The individual has a normal level of psychomotor activity even though attention and awareness are disturbed. Also includes individuals whose activity level rapidly fluctuates.', 'The name of the substance/medication intoxication delirium begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'The name of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substance/medication intoxication delirium and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For example, in the case of acute hyperactive intoxication delirium occurring in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.81 cocaine intoxication delirium, acute, hyperactive. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also given. If the intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., 292.81 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive).', '', 'The name of the substance/medication intoxication delirium begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance intoxication delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in the case of acute hyperactive intoxication delirium occurring in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.221 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine intoxication delirium, acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.921 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive).', 'The name of the substance/medication withdrawal delirium begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delirium. The diagnostic code is selected from substance-specific codes included in the coding note included in the criteria set. The name of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substance/medication withdrawal delirium and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For example, in the case of acute hyperactive withdrawal delirium occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is 291.0 alcohol withdrawal delirium, acute, hyperactive. An additional diagnosis of 303.90 severe alcohol use disorder is also given.The name of the substance/medication withdrawal delirium begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delirium. The diagnostic code is selected from substance-specific codes included in the coding note included in the criteria set. When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid moderate or severe substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the substance withdrawal delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in the case of acute hyperactive withdrawal delirium occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.231 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal delirium, acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given.', 'Medication-induced delirium', '', 'The name of the medication-induced delirium begins with the specific substance (e.g., dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The name of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in the case of acute hyperactive medication-induced delirium occurring in a man using dexamethasone as prescribed, the diagnosis is 292.81 (F19.921) dexamethasone-induced delirium, acute, hyperactive.', 'Specifiers', '', 'Regarding course, in hospital settings, delirium usually lasts about 1 week, but some symptoms often persist even after individuals are discharged from the hospital.', '', 'Individuals with delirium may rapidly switch between hyperactive and hypoactive states. The hyperactive state may be more common or more frequently recognized(Camus et al. 2000) and often is associated with medication side effects and drug withdrawal. The hypoactive state may be more frequent in older adults.', '', 'The essential feature of delirium is a disturbance of attention or awareness that is accompanied by a change in baseline cognition that cannot be better explained by a preexisting or evolving neurocognitive disorder (NCD). The disturbance in attention (Criterion A) is manifested by reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention. Questions must be repeated because the individual’s attention wanders, or the individual may perseverate with an answer to a previous question rather than appropriately shift attention. The individual is easily distracted by irrelevant stimuli. The disturbance in awareness is manifested by a reduced orientation to the environment or at times even to oneself(Choi et al. 2012).', '', 'The disturbance develops over a short period of time, usually hours to a few days, and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day, often with worsening in the evening and night when external orienting stimuli decrease (Criterion B). There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a physiological consequence of an underlying medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal, use of a medication, or a toxin exposure, or a combination of these factors (Criterion E). The etiology should be coded according to the etiologically appropriate subtype (i.e., substance or medication intoxication, substance withdrawal, another medical condition, or multiple etiologies). Delirium often occurs in the context of an underlying NCD(Cole et al. 2002; Inouye 2006). The impaired brain function of individuals with mild and major NCD renders them more vulnerable to delirium.', '', 'There is an accompanying change in at least one other area that may include memory and learning (particularly recent memory), disorientation (particularly to time and place), alteration in language, or perceptual distortion or a perceptual-motor disturbance (Criterion C). The perceptual disturbances accompanying delirium include misinterpretations, illusions, or hallucinations; these disturbances are typically visual, but may occur in other modalities as well, and range from simple and uniform to highly complex. Normal attention/arousal, delirium, and coma lie on a continuum, with coma defined as the lack of any response to verbal stimuli. The ability to evaluate cognition to diagnose delirium depends on there being a level of arousal sufficient for response to verbal stimulation; hence, delirium should not be diagnosed in the context of coma (Criterion D). Many noncomatose patients have a reduced level of arousal. Those patients who show only minimal responses to verbal stimulation are incapable of engaging with attempts at standardized testing or even interview. This inability to engage should be classified as severe inattention. Low-arousal states (of acute onset) should be recognized as indicating severe inattention and cognitive change, and hence delirium. They are clinically indistinguishable from delirium diagnosed on the basis of inattention or cognitive change elicited through cognitive testing and interview. ', ' Delirium is often associated with a disturbance in the sleep-wake cycle. This disturbance can include daytime sleepiness, nighttime agitation, difficulty falling asleep, excessive sleepiness throughout the day, or wakefulness throughout the night. In some cases, complete reversal of the night-day sleep-wake cycle can occur. Sleep-wake cycle disturbances are very common in delirium and have been proposed as a core criterion for the diagnosis(Jabbar et al. 2011).', '', 'The individual with delirium may exhibit emotional disturbances, such as anxiety, fear, depression, irritability, anger, euphoria, and apathy(Jabbar et al. 2011). There may be rapid and unpredictable shifts from one emotional state to another. The disturbed emotional state may also be evident in calling out, screaming, cursing, muttering, moaning, or making other sounds. These behaviors are especially prevalent at night and under conditions in which stimulation and environmental cues are lacking.', 'The prevalence of delirium is highest among hospitalized older individuals and varies depending on the individuals’ characteristics, setting of care, and sensitivity of the detection method. The prevalence of delirium in the community overall is low (1%–2%)(Inouye 2006) but increases with age, rising to 14% among individuals older than 85 years. The prevalence is 10%–30% in older individuals presenting to emergency departments, where the delirium often indicates a medical illness(Inouye 2006). The prevalence of delirium when individuals are admitted to the hospital ranges from 14% to 24%, and estimates of the incidence of delirium arising during hospitalization range from 6% to 56% in general hospital populations(Agostino and Inouye 2003; Inouye 1998). Delirium occurs in 15%–53% of older individuals postoperatively(Agostino and Inouye 2003) and in 70%–87% of those in intensive care(Pisani et al. 2003). Delirium occurs in up to 60% of individuals in nursing homes or post–acute care settings(Boorsma et al. 2012) and in up to 83% of all individuals at the end of life(Casarett 2003).While the majority of individuals with delirium have a full recovery with or without treatment, early recognition and intervention usually shortens the duration of the delirium(Solai 2009). Delirium may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, or death, particularly if the underlying cause remains untreated. Mortality among hospitalized individuals with delirium is high, and as many as 40% of individuals with delirium, particularly those with malignancies and other significant underlying medical illness, die within a year after diagnosis(Inouye 2006). Delirium may be increased in the context of functional impairment, immobility, a history of falls, low levels of activity, and use of drugs and medications with psychoactive properties (particularly alcohol and anticholinergics).Both major and mild NCDs can increase the risk for delirium and complicate the course. Older individuals are especially susceptible to delirium compared with younger adults. Susceptibility to delirium in infancy and through childhood may be greater than in early and middle adulthood. In childhood, delirium may be related to febrile illnesses and certain medications (e.g., anticholinergics).In addition to laboratory findings characteristic of underlying medical conditions (or intoxication or withdrawal states), there is often generalized slowing on electroencephalography, and fast activity is occasionally found (e.g., in some cases of alcohol withdrawal delirium). However, electroencephalography is insufficiently sensitive and specific for diagnostic use(Inouye 1998).Delirium itself is associated with increased functional decline and risk of institutional placement. Hospitalized individuals 65 years or older with delirium have three times the risk of nursing home placement and about three times the functional decline as hospitalized patients without delirium at both discharge and 3 months postdischarge.', 'Psychotic disorders and bipolar and depressive disorders with psychotic features', '', 'Delirium that is characterized by vivid hallucinations, delusions, language disturbances, and agitation must be distinguished from brief psychotic disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, and other psychotic disorders, as well as from bipolar and depressive disorders with psychotic features.', 'Acute stress disorder', '', 'Delirium associated with fear, anxiety, and dissociative symptoms, such as depersonalization, must be distinguished from acute stress disorder, which is precipitated by exposure to a severely traumatic event.', 'Malingering and factitious disorder', '', 'Delirium can be distinguished from these disorders on the basis of the often atypical presentation in malingering and factitious disorder and the absence of another medical condition or substance that is etiologically related to the apparent cognitive disturbance.', 'Other neurocognitive disorders', '', 'The most common differential diagnostic issue when evaluating confusion in older adults is disentangling symptoms of delirium and dementia(Cole et al. 2002; Fick et al. 2002). The clinician must determine whether the individual has delirium; a delirium superimposed on a preexisting NCD, such as that due to Alzheimer’s disease; or an NCD without delirium. The traditional distinction between delirium and dementia according to acuteness of onset and temporal course is particularly difficult in those elderly individuals who had a prior NCD that may not have been recognized, or who develop persistent cognitive impairment following an episode of delirium.', '', '']