['Major/Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s Disease', 'The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', 'There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or more cognitive domains (for major neurocognitive disorder, at least two domains must be impaired).', 'Criteria are met for either probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease as follows:', 'For major neurocognitive disorder:', 'Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if either of the following is present; otherwise, possible Alzheimer’s disease should be diagnosed.', 'Evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from family history or genetic testing.', 'All three of the following are present:', 'Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning and at least one other cognitive domain (based on detailed history or serial neuropsychological testing).', 'Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended plateaus.', 'No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological, mental, or systemic disease or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).', 'The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental, neurological, or systemic disorder.', 'Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and', 'A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework, managing money).', 'Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).', 'Severe: Fully dependent.', 'Beyond the neurocognitive disorder (NCD) syndrome (Criterion A), the core features of major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease include an insidious onset and gradual progression of cognitive and behavioral symptoms (Criterion B)(Albert et al. 2011; McKhann et al. 2011). The typical presentation is amnestic (i.e., with impairment in memory and learning). Unusual nonamnestic presentations, particularly visuospatial and logopenic aphasic variants, also exist. At the mild NCD phase, Alzheimer’s disease manifests typically with impairment in memory and learning, sometimes accompanied by deficits in executive function. At the major NCD phase, visuoconstructional/perceptual-motor ability and language will also be impaired, particularly when the NCD is moderate to severe. Social cognition tends to be preserved until late in the course of the disease.', '', 'A level of diagnostic certainty must be specified denoting Alzheimer’s disease as the “probable” or “possible” etiology (Criterion C). Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed in both major and mild NCD if there is evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease gene, either from genetic testing or from an autosomal dominant family history coupled with autopsy confirmation or a genetic test in an affected family member. For major NCD, a typical clinical picture, without extended plateaus or evidence of mixed etiology, can also be diagnosed as due to probable Alzheimer’s disease. For mild NCD, given the lesser degree of certainty that the deficits will progress, these features are only sufficient for a possible Alzheimer’s etiology. If the etiology appears mixed, mild NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed. In any case, for both mild and major NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, the clinical features must not suggest another primary etiology for the NCD (Criterion D).', 'In specialty clinical settings, approximately 80% of individuals with major NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease have behavioral and psychological manifestations; these features are also frequent at the mild NCD stage of impairment(Apostolova and Cummings 2008). These symptoms are as or more distressing than cognitive manifestations and are frequently the reason that health care is sought. At the mild NCD stage or the mildest level of major NCD, depression and/or apathy are often seen. With moderately severe major NCD, psychotic features, irritability, agitation, combativeness, and wandering are common. Late in the illness, gait disturbance, dysphagia, incontinence, myoclonus, and seizures are observed.The prevalence of overall dementia (major NCD) rises steeply with age. In high-income countries, it ranges from 5% to 10% in the seventh decade to at least 25% thereafter(Ferri et al. 2005). U.S. census data estimates suggest that approximately 7% of individuals diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease are between ages 65 and 74 years, 53% are between ages 75 and 84 years, and 40% are 85 years and older(Hebert et al. 2003). The percentage of dementias attributable to Alzheimer’s disease ranges from about 60% to over 90%, depending on the setting and diagnostic criteria. Mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to represent a substantial fraction of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as well(Busse et al. 2003; Petersen 2011).', '', 'Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease progresses gradually, sometimes with brief plateaus, through severe dementia to death. The mean duration of survival after diagnosis is approximately 10 years(Warner and Butler 2000), reflecting the advanced age of the majority of individuals rather than the course of the disease; some individuals can live with the disease for as long as 20 years. Late-stage individuals are eventually mute and bedbound. Death most commonly results from aspiration in those who survive through the full course. In mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, impairments increase over time, and functional status gradually declines until symptoms reach the threshold for the diagnosis of major NCD.', '', 'The onset of symptoms is usually in the eighth and ninth decades; early-onset forms seen in the fifth and sixth decades are often related to known causative mutations. Symptoms and pathology do not differ markedly at different onset ages. However, younger individuals are more likely to survive the full course of the disease, while older individuals are more likely to have numerous medical comorbidities that affect the course and management of the illness. Diagnostic complexity is higher in older adults because of the increased likelihood of comorbid medical illness and mixed pathology.', 'Traumatic brain injury increases risk for major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease.Age is the strongest risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. The genetic susceptibility polymorphism apolipoprotein E4 increases risk and decreases age at onset, particularly in homozygous individuals. There are also extremely rare causative Alzheimer’s disease genes(Bertram et al. 2010). Individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy 21) develop Alzheimer’s disease if they survive to midlife. Multiple vascular risk factors influence risk for Alzheimer’s disease and may act by increasing cerebrovascular pathology or also through direct effects on Alzheimer pathology(Weuve et al. 2012). Detection of an NCD may be more difficult in cultural and socioeconomic settings where memory loss is considered normal in old age, where older adults face fewer cognitive demands in everyday life, or where very low educational levels pose greater challenges to objective cognitive assessment.', '', 'Cortical atrophy, amyloid-predominant neuritic plaques, and tau-predominant neurofibrillary tangles are hallmarks of the pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and may be confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination. For early-onset cases with autosomal dominant inheritance, a mutation in one of the known causative Alzheimer’s disease genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)—may be involved, and genetic testing for such mutations is commercially available, at least for PSEN1. Apolipoprotein E4 cannot serve as a diagnostic marker because it is only a risk factor and neither necessary nor sufficient for disease occurrence.', '', 'Since amyloid beta-42 deposition in the brain occurs early in the pathophysiological cascade, amyloid-based diagnostic tests such as amyloid imaging on brain positron emission tomography (PET) scans and reduced levels of amyloid beta-42 in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may have diagnostic value. Signs of neuronal injury, such as hippocampal and temporoparietal cortical atrophy on a magnetic resonance image scan, temporoparietal hypometabolism on a fluorodeoxyglucose PET scan, and evidence for elevated total tau and phospho-tau levels in CSF(Jack et al. 2011), provide evidence of neuronal damage but are less specific for Alzheimer’s disease. At present, these biomarkers are not fully validated, and many are available only in tertiary care settings. However, some of them, along with novel biomarkers, will likely move into wider clinical practice in the coming years. ', 'The prominence of memory loss can cause significant difficulties relatively early in the course. Social cognition (and thus social functioning) and procedural memory (e.g., dancing, playing musical instruments) may be relatively preserved for extended periods.', 'Other neurocognitive disorders', '', 'Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenerative processes (e.g., Lewy body disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration) share the insidious onset and gradual decline caused by Alzheimer’s disease but have distinctive core features of their own. In major or mild vascular NCD, there is typically history of stroke temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment, and infarcts or white matter hyperintensities are judged sufficient to account for the clinical picture. However, particularly when there is no clear history of stepwise decline, major or mild vascular NCD can share many clinical features with Alzheimer’s disease.', 'Other concurrent, active neurological or systemic illness', '', 'Other neurological or systemic illness should be considered if there is an appropriate temporal relationship and severity to account for the clinical picture. At the mild NCD level, it may be difficult to distinguish an Alzheimer’s disease etiology from that of another medical condition (e.g., thyroid disorders, vitamin B12 deficiency).', 'Major depressive disorder', '', 'Particularly at the mild NCD level, the differential diagnosis also includes major depression. The presence of depression may be associated with reduced daily functioning and poor concentration that may resemble an NCD, but improvement with treatment of depression may be useful in making the distinction.', 'Most individuals with Alzheimer’s disease are elderly and have multiple medical conditions that can complicate diagnosis and influence the clinical course. Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease commonly co-occurs with cerebrovascular disease, which contributes to the clinical picture. When a comorbid condition contributes to the NCD in an individual with Alzheimer’s disease, then NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed.', 'Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function; and', 'A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater effort, compensatory strategies, or accommodation may be required).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', '', '']