['Major/Mild Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder', 'The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', 'The disturbance has insidious onset and gradual progression.', 'Either (1) or (2):', 'Behavioral variant:', 'Three or more of the following behavioral symptoms:', 'Behavioral disinhibition.', 'Apathy or inertia.', 'Loss of sympathy or empathy.', 'Perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive/ritualistic behavior.', 'Hyperorality and dietary changes.', 'Prominent decline in social cognition and/or executive abilities.', 'Language variant:', 'Prominent decline in language ability, in the form of speech production, word finding, object naming, grammar, or word comprehension.', 'Relative sparing of learning and memory and perceptual-motor function.', 'The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental, neurological, or systemic disorder.', 'Probable frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if either of the following is present; otherwise, possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder should be diagnosed:', 'Evidence of a causative frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder genetic mutation, from either family history or genetic testing.', 'Evidence of disproportionate frontal and/or temporal lobe involvement from neuroimaging.', 'Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and', 'A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework, managing money).', 'Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).', 'Severe: Fully dependent.', 'Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function; and', 'A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater effort, compensatory strategies, or accommodation may be required).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', ' Major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder (NCD) comprises a number of syndromic variants characterized by the progressive development of behavioral and personality change and/or language impairment. The behavioral variant and three language variants (semantic, agrammatic/nonfluent, and logopenic) exhibit distinct patterns of brain atrophy and some distinctive neuropathology. The criteria must be met for either the behavioral or the language variant to make the diagnosis, but many individuals present with features of both.', '', 'Individuals with behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with varying degrees of apathy or disinhibition(Rascovsky et al. 2011). They may lose interest in socialization, self-care, and personal responsibilities, or display socially inappropriate behaviors. Insight is usually impaired, and this often delays medical consultation. The first referral is often to a psychiatrist. Individuals may develop changes in social style, and in religious and political beliefs, with repetitive movements, hoarding, changes in eating behavior, and hyperorality(Rabinovici and Miller 2010). In later stages, loss of sphincter control may occur. Cognitive decline is less prominent, and formal testing may show relatively few deficits in the early stages. Common neurocognitive symptoms are lack of planning and organization, distractibility, and poor judgment. Deficits in executive function, such as poor performance on tests of mental flexibility, abstract reasoning, and response inhibition, are present, but learning and memory are relatively spared, and perceptual-motor abilities are almost always preserved in the early stages.', '', 'Individuals with language-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with primary progressive aphasia with gradual onset(Mesulam 1987), with three subtypes commonly described: semantic variant, agrammatic/nonfluent variant, and logopenic variant(Gorno-Tempini et al. 2011; Josephs 2008), and each variant has distinctive features and corresponding neuropathology.', '“Probable” is distinguished from “possible” frontotemporal NCD by the presence of causative genetic factors (e.g., mutations in the gene coding for microtubule-associated protein tau) or by the presence of distinctive atrophy or reduced activity in frontotemporal regions on structural or functional imaging. Extrapyramidal features may be prominent in some cases, with an overlap with syndromes such as progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Features of motor neuron disease may be present in some cases (e.g., muscle atrophy, weakness). A subset of individuals develop visual hallucinations.Major or mild frontotemporal NCD is a common cause of early-onset NCD in individuals younger than 65 years. Population prevalence estimates are in the range of 2–10 per 100,000(Knopman et al. 2004; Ratnavalli et al. 2002). Approximately 20%–25% of cases of frontotemporal NCD occur in individuals older than 65 years. Frontotemporal NCD accounts for about 5% of all cases of dementia in unselected autopsy series(Rabinovici and Miller 2010). Prevalence estimates of behavioral variant and semantic language variant are higher among males, and prevalence estimates of nonfluent language variant are higher among females. Individuals with major or mild frontotemporal NCD commonly present in the sixth decade of life, although the age at onset varies from the third to the ninth decades(Rabinovici and Miller 2010). The disease is gradually progressive, with median survival being 6–11 years after symptom onset and 3–4 years after diagnosis. Survival is shorter and decline is faster in major or mild frontotemporal NCD than in typical Alzheimer’s disease. Approximately 40% of individuals with major or mild frontotemporal NCD have a family history of early-onset NCD, and approximately 10% show an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. A number of genetic factors have been identified, such as mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT), the granulin gene (GRN), and the C9ORF72 gene. A number of families with causative mutations have been identified (see the section “Diagnostic Markers” for this disorder), but many individuals with known familial transmission do not have a known mutation. The presence of motor neuron disease is associated with a more rapid deterioration.', '', 'Computed tomography (CT) or structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show distinct patterns of atrophy. In behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, both frontal lobes (especially the medial frontal lobes) and the anterior temporal lobes are atrophic. In semantic language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, the middle, inferior, and anterior temporal lobes are atrophic bilaterally but asymmetrically, with the left side usually being more affected. Nonfluent language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD is associated with predominantly left posterior frontal-insular atrophy. The logopenic variant of major or mild frontotemporal NCD is associated with predominantly left posterior perisylvian or parietal atrophy(Gorno-Tempini et al. 2011; Josephs 2008). Functional imaging demonstrates hypoperfusion and/or cortical hypometabolism in the corresponding brain regions, which may be present in the early stages in the absence of structural abnormality. Emerging biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and tau levels, and amyloid imaging) may help in the differential diagnosis, but the distinction from Alzheimer’s disease can remain difficult (the logopenic variant is in fact often a manifestation of Alzheimer’s disease).', '', 'In familial cases of frontotemporal NCD, the identification of genetic mutations may help confirm the diagnosis. Mutations associated with frontotemporal NCD include the genes encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and granulin (GRN), C9ORF72, transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43, or TARDBP), valosin-containing protein (VCP), chromatin modifying protein 2B (CHMP2B), and fused in sarcoma protein (FUS).', 'Because of the relative early age at onset of the disorder, the disorder often affects workplace and family life. Because of the involvement of language and/or behavior, function is often more severely impaired relatively early in the course. For individuals with the behavioral variant, prior to diagnostic clarification there may be significant family disruption, legal involvement, and problems in the workplace because of socially inappropriate behaviors. The functional impairment due to behavioral change and language dysfunction, which can include hyperorality, impulsive wandering, and other disinhibited behaviors, may far exceed that due to the cognitive disturbance and may lead to nursing home placement or institutionalization. These behaviors can be severely disruptive, even in structured care settings, particularly when the individuals are otherwise healthy, nonfrail, and free of other medical comorbidities.', 'Other neurocognitive disorders', '', 'Other neurodegenerative diseases may be distinguished from major or mild frontotemporal NCD by their characteristic features. In major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, decline in learning and memory is an early feature. However, 10%–30% of patients presenting with a syndrome suggestive of major or mild frontotemporal NCD are found at autopsy to have Alzheimer’s disease pathology. This occurs more frequently in individuals who present with progressive dysexecutive syndromes in the absence of behavioral changes or movement disorder or in those with the logopenic variant(Johnson et al. 1999; Mesulam et al. 2008).', '', 'In major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, core and suggestive features of Lewy bodies must be present. In major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, spontaneous parkinsonism emerges well before the cognitive decline. In major or mild vascular NCD, depending on affected brain regions, there may also be loss of executive ability and behavioral changes such as apathy, and this disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis. However, history of a cerebrovascular event is temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment in major or mild vascular NCD, and neuroimaging reveals infarctions or white matter lesions sufficient to account for the clinical picture.', 'Other neurological conditions', '', 'Major or mild frontotemporal NCD overlaps with progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and motor neuron disease clinically as well as pathologically. Progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by supranuclear gaze palsies and axial-predominant parkinsonism. Pseudobulbar signs may be present, and retropulsion is often prominent. Neurocognitive assessment shows psychomotor slowing, poor working memory, and executive dysfunction. Corticobasal degeneration presents with asymmetric rigidity, limb apraxia, postural instability, myoclonus, alien limb phenomenon, and cortical sensory loss. Many individuals with behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD show features of motor neuron disease, which tend to be mixed upper and predominantly lower motor neuron disease.', 'Other mental disorders and medical conditions', '', 'Behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD may be mistaken for a primary mental disorder, such as major depression, bipolar disorders, or schizophrenia, and individuals with this variant often present initially to psychiatry. Over time, the development of progressive neurocognitive difficulties will help to make the distinction. A careful medical evaluation will help to exclude treatable causes of NCDs, such as metabolic disturbances, nutritional deficiencies, and infections.', '', '']