['Substance/Medication-Induced Major/Mild Neurocognitive Disorder', '', '', '    The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', '', '    The neurocognitive impairments do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium and persist beyond the usual duration of intoxication and acute withdrawal.', '', '    The involved substance or medication and duration and extent of use are capable of producing the neurocognitive impairment.', '', '    The temporal course of the neurocognitive deficits is consistent with the timing of substance or medication use and abstinence (e.g., the deficits remain stable or improve after a period of abstinence).', '', '    The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition or is not better explained by another mental disorder.', '', 'Specify if:', '', '    Persistent: Neurocognitive impairment continues to be significant after an extended period of abstinence.', 'Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and', 'A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework, managing money).', 'Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).', 'Severe: Fully dependent. Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function; and', 'A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater effort, compensatory strategies, or accommodation may be required).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'The name of the substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder begins with the specific substance/medication (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the neurocognitive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes, the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'The name of the disorder (i.e., [specific substance]-induced major neurocognitive disorder or [specific substance]-induced mild neurocognitive disorder) is followed by the type in the case of alcohol (i.e., nonamnestic-confabulatory type, amnestic-confabulatory type), followed by specification of duration (i.e., persistent). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substance/medication-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For example, in the case of persistent amnestic-confabulatory symptoms in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is 291.1 alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, amnestic-confabulatory type, persistent. An additional diagnosis of 303.90 severe alcohol use disorder is also given. If the substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a sporadic heavy use of inhalants), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., 292.82 inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder).', '', 'The name of the substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the neurocognitive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes, the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the disorder (i.e., [specific substance]-induced major neurocognitive disorder or [specific substance]-induced mild neurocognitive disorder), followed by the type in the case of alcohol (i.e., nonamnestic-confabulatory type, amnestic-confabulatory type), followed by specification of duration (i.e., persistent). For example, in the case of persistent amnestic-confabulatory symptoms in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.26 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, amnestic-confabulatory type, persistent. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced neurocognitive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a sporadic heavy use of inhalants), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F18.988 inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder).', '', 'Substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD is characterized by neurocognitive impairments that persist beyond the usual duration of intoxication and acute withdrawal (Criterion B). Initially, these manifestations can reflect slow recovery of brain functions from a period of prolonged substance use, and improvements in neurocognitive as well as brain imaging indicators may be seen over many months(Grant et al. 1987; Monnig et al. 2012; Rourke and Grant 2009). If the disorder continues for an extended period, persistent should be specified. The given substance and its use must be known to be capable of causing the observed impairments (Criterion C). While nonspecific decrements in a range of cognitive abilities can occur with nearly any substance of abuse and a variety of medications, some patterns occur more frequently with selected drug classes. For example, NCD due to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines, barbiturates) may show greater disturbances in memory than in other cognitive functions. NCD induced by alcohol frequently manifests with a combination of impairments in executive-function and memory and learning domains. The temporal course of the substance-induced NCD must be consistent with that of use of the given substance (Criterion D). In alcohol-induced amnestic confabulatory (Korsakoff’s) NCD, the features include prominent amnesia (severe difficulty learning new information with rapid forgetting) and a tendency to confabulate. These manifestations may co-occur with signs of thiamine encephalopathy (Wernicke’s encephalopathy) with associated features such as nystagmus and ataxia. Ophthalmoplegia of Wernicke’s encephalopathy is typically characterized by a lateral gaze paralysis.', '', 'In addition to or independent of the more common neurocognitive symptoms related to methamphetamine use (e.g., difficulties with learning and memory; executive function), methamphetamine use can also be associated with evidence of vascular injury (e.g., focal weakness, unilateral incoordination, asymmetrical reflexes). The most common neurocognitive profile approximates that seen in vascular NCD.', 'Intermediate-duration NCD induced by drugs with central nervous system depressant effects may manifest with added symptoms of increased irritability, anxiety, sleep disturbance, and dysphoria. Intermediate-duration NCD induced by stimulant drugs may manifest with rebound depression, hypersomnia, and apathy. In severe forms of substance/medication-induced major NCD (e.g., associated with long-term alcohol use), there may be prominent neuromotor features, such as incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing. There may also be loss of emotional control, including aggressive or inappropriate affect, or apathy.', '', 'The prevalence of these conditions is not known. Prevalence figures for substance abuse are available, and substance/medication-induced major or mild NCDs are more likely in those who are older, have longer use, and have other risk factors such as nutritional deficits(Stavro et al. 2012).', '', 'For alcohol abuse, the rate of mild NCD of intermediate duration is approximately 30%–40% in the first 2 months of abstinence(Rourke and Grant 2009). Mild NCD may persist, particularly in those who do not achieve stable abstinence until after age 50 years. Major NCD is rare and may result from concomitant nutritional deficits, as in alcohol-induced amnestic confabulatory NCD.', '', 'For individuals quitting cocaine, methamphetamine, opioids, phencyclidine, and sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics(Gonzalez et al. 2009), substance/medication-induced mild NCD of intermediate duration may occur in one-third or more, and there is some evidence that these substances may also be associated with persistent mild NCD(Scott et al. 2007). Major NCD associated with these substances is rare, if it occurs at all. In the case of methamphetamine, cerebrovascular disease can also occur, resulting in diffuse or focal brain injury that can be of mild or major neurocognitive levels. Solvent exposure has been linked to both major and mild NCD of both intermediate and persistent duration(Dingwall and Cairney 2011).', '', 'The presence of NCD induced by cannabis and various hallucinogens is controversial. With cannabis, intoxication is accompanied by various neurocognitive disturbances, but these tend to clear with abstinence(Grant et al. 2003; Pope et al. 2001).', 'Substance use disorders tend to commence during adolescence and peak in the 20s and 30s. Although longer history of severe substance use disorder is associated with greater likelihood of NCD, the relationships are not straightforward, with substantial and even complete recovery of neurocognitive functions being common among individuals who achieve stable abstinence prior to age 50 years. Substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD is most likely to become persistent in individuals who continue abuse of substances past age 50 years, presumably because of a combination of lessened neural plasticity and beginnings of other age-related brain changes. Earlier commencement of abuse, particularly of alcohol, may lead to defects in later neural development (e.g., later stages of maturation of frontal circuitries), which may have effects on social cognition as well as other neurocognitive abilities. For alcohol-induced NCD, there may be an additive effect of aging and alcohol-induced brain injury.Risk factors for substance/medication-induced NCDs include older age, longer use, and persistent use past age 50 years. In addition, for alcohol-induced NCD, long-term nutritional deficiencies, liver disease, vascular risk factors, and cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease may contribute to risk. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of individuals with chronic alcohol abuse frequently reveals cortical thinning, white matter loss, and enlargement of sulci and ventricles. While neuroimaging abnormalities are more common in those with NCDs, it is possible to observe NCDs without neuroimaging abnormalities, and vice versa. Specialized techniques (e.g., diffusion tensor imaging) may reveal damage to specific white matter tracts. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy may reveal reduction in N-acetylaspartate, and increase in markers of inflammation (e.g., myoinositol) or white matter injury (e.g., choline). Many of these brain imaging changes and neurocognitive manifestations reverse following successful abstinence. In individuals with methamphetamine use disorder, MRI may also reveal hyperintensities suggestive of microhemorrhages or larger areas of infarction.The functional consequences of substance/medication-induced mild NCD are sometimes augmented by reduced cognitive efficiency and difficulty concentrating beyond that seen in many other NCDs. In addition, at both major and mild levels, substance/medication-induced NCDs may have associated motor syndromes that increase the level of functional impairment. Individuals with substance use disorders, substance intoxication, and substance withdrawal are at increased risk for other conditions that may independently, or through a compounding effect, result in neurocognitive disturbance. These include history of traumatic brain injury and infections that can accompany substance use disorder (e.g., HIV, hepatitis C virus, syphilis). Therefore, presence of substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD should be differentiated from NCDs arising outside the context of substance use, intoxication, and withdrawal, including these accompanying conditions (e.g., traumatic brain injury).Substance use disorders, substance intoxication, and substance withdrawal are highly comorbid with other mental disorders(Compton et al. 2007). Comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder, psychotic disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders, and neurodevelopmental disorders can contribute to neurocognitive impairment in substance users. Traumatic brain injury occurs more frequently with substance use, complicating efforts to determine the etiology of NCD in such cases(Corrigan et al. 2012; West 2011). Severe, long-term alcohol use disorder can be associated with major organ system disease, including cerebrovascular disease and cirrhosis. Amphetamine-induced NCD may be accompanied by major or mild vascular NCD, also secondary to amphetamine use.', '', '']