['Major/Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to HIV Infection', '', '', '    The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', '', '    There is documented infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).', '', '    The neurocognitive disorder is not better explained by non-HIV conditions, including secondary brain diseases such as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy or cryptococcal meningitis.', '', '    The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and is not better explained by a mental disorder.', 'Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and', 'A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework, managing money).', 'Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).', 'Severe: Fully dependent. Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function; and', 'A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater effort, compensatory strategies, or accommodation may be required).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'HIV disease is caused by infection with human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1), which is acquired through exposure to bodily fluids of an infected person through injection drug use, unprotected sexual contact, or accidental or iatrogenic exposure (e.g., contaminated blood supply, needle puncture injury to medical personnel). HIV infects several types of cells, most particularly immune cells. Over time, the infection can cause severe depletion of “T-helper” (CD4) lymphocytes, resulting in severe immunocompromise, often leading to opportunistic infections and neoplasms. This advanced form of HIV infection is termed acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Diagnosis of HIV is confirmed by established laboratory methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for HIV antibody with Western blot confirmation and/or polymerase chain reaction–based assays for HIV.', '', 'Some individuals with HIV infection develop an NCD, which generally shows a “subcortical pattern” with prominently impaired executive function, slowing of processing speed, problems with more demanding attentional tasks, and difficulty in learning new information, but fewer problems with recall of learned information. In major NCD, slowing may be prominent. Language difficulties, such as aphasia, are uncommon, although reductions in fluency may be observed. HIV pathogenic processes can affect any part of the brain; therefore, other patterns are possible(Antinori et al. 2007; Woods et al. 2009).', 'Major or mild NCD due to HIV infection is usually more prevalent in individuals with prior episodes of severe immunosuppression, high viral loads in the cerebrospinal fluid, and indicators of advanced HIV disease such as anemia and hypoalbuminemia. Individuals with advanced NCD may experience prominent neuromotor features such as severe incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing. There may be loss of emotional control, including aggressive or inappropriate affect or apathy. Depending on stage of HIV disease, approximately one-third to over one-half of HIV-infected individuals have at least mild neurocognitive disturbance, but some of these disturbances may not meet the full criteria for mild NCD. An estimated 25% of individuals with HIV will have signs and symptoms that meet criteria for mild NCD, and in fewer than 5% would criteria for major NCD be met(Heaton et al. 2010).', '', 'An NCD due to HIV infection can resolve, improve, slowly worsen, or have a fluctuating course. Rapid progression to profound neurocognitive impairment is uncommon in the context of currently available combination antiviral treatment; consequently, an abrupt change in mental status in an individual with HIV may prompt an evaluation of other medical sources for the cognitive change, including secondary infections. Because HIV infection preferentially affects subcortical regions over the course of illness, including deep white matter, the progression of the disorder follows a “subcortical” pattern. Since HIV can affect a variety of brain regions, and the illness can take on many different trajectories depending on associated comorbidities and consequences of HIV, the overall course of an NCD due to HIV infection has considerable heterogeneity. A subcortical neurocognitive profile may interact with age over the life course, when psychomotor slowing and motor impairments such as slowed gait may occur as a consequence of other age-related conditions so that the overall progression may appear more pronounced in later life.', '', 'In developed countries, HIV disease is primarily a condition of adults, with acquisition via risky behaviors (e.g., unprotected sex, injection drug use) beginning in late adolescence and peaking during young and middle adulthood. In developing countries, particularly sub-Saharan Africa, where HIV testing and antiretroviral treatments for pregnant women are not readily available, perinatal transmission is common. The NCD in such infants and children may present primarily as neurodevelopmental delay. As individuals treated for HIV survive into older age, additive and interactive neurocognitive effects of HIV and aging, including other NCDs (e.g., due to Alzheimer’s disease, due to Parkinson’s disease), are possible.', 'Risk and prognostic factors for HIV infection', '', 'Risk factors for HIV infection include injection drug use, unprotected sex, and unprotected blood supply and other iatrogenic factors.', 'Risk and prognostic factors for major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection', '', 'Paradoxically, NCD due to HIV infection has not declined significantly with the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy, although the most severe presentations (consistent with the diagnosis of major NCD) have decreased sharply(Heaton et al. 2010). Contributory factors may include inadequate control of HIV in the central nervous system (CNS), the evolution of drug-resistant viral strains, the effects of chronic long-term systemic and brain inflammation, and the effects of comorbid factors such as aging, drug abuse, past history of CNS trauma, and co-infections, such as with the hepatitis C virus. Chronic exposure to antiretroviral drugs also raises the possibility of neurotoxicity, although this has not been definitively established(Kaul 2009).', 'Serum HIV testing is required for the diagnosis. In addition, HIV characterization of the cerebrospinal fluid may be helpful if it reveals a disproportionately high viral load in cerebrospinal fluid versus in the plasma. Neuroimaging (i.e., magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) may reveal reduction in total brain volume, cortical thinning, reduction in white matter volume, and patchy areas of abnormal white matter (hyperintensities). MRI or lumbar puncture may be helpful to exclude a specific medical condition such as cryptococcus infection or herpes encephalitis that may contribute to CNS changes in the context of AIDS. Specialized techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging may reveal damage to specific white matter tracts.Functional consequences of major or mild NCD due to HIV infection are variable across individuals. Thus, impaired executive abilities and slowed information processing may substantially interfere with the complex disease management decisions required for adherence to the combined antiretroviral therapy regimen. The likelihood of comorbid disease may further create functional challenges. In the presence of comorbidities, such as other infections (e.g., hepatitis C virus, syphilis), drug abuse (e.g., methamphetamine abuse), or prior head injury or neurodevelopmental conditions, major or mild NCD due to HIV infection can be diagnosed provided there is evidence that infection with HIV has worsened any NCDs due to such preexisting or comorbid conditions. Among older adults, onset of neurocognitive decline related to cerebrovascular disease or neurodegeneration (e.g., major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease) may need to be differentiated. In general, stable, fluctuating (without progression) or improving neurocognitive status would favor an HIV etiology, whereas steady or stepwise deterioration would suggest neurodegenerative or vascular etiology. Because more severe immunodeficiency can result in opportunistic infections of the brain (e.g., toxoplasmosis; cryptococcosis) and neoplasia (e.g., CNS lymphoma), sudden onset of an NCD or sudden worsening of that disorder demands active investigation of non-HIV etiologies.HIV disease is accompanied by chronic systemic and neuro-inflammation that can be associated with cerebrovascular disease and metabolic syndrome. These complications can be part of the pathogenesis of major or mild NCD due to HIV infection. HIV frequently co-occurs with conditions such as substance use disorders when the substance has been injected and other sexually transmitted disorders. ', '', '']