['Major/Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Huntington’s Disease', 'The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.', 'There is insidious onset and gradual progression.', 'There is clinically established Huntington’s disease, or risk for Huntington’s disease based on family history or genetic testing.', 'The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder.', 'Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a significant decline in cognitive function; and', 'A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a minimum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework, managing money).', 'Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).', 'Severe: Fully dependent. Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:', 'Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has been a mild decline in cognitive function; and', 'A modest impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by standardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical assessment.', 'The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater effort, compensatory strategies, or accommodation may be required).', 'The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.', 'The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, schizophrenia).', 'Specify:', 'Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.', 'With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).', 'Progressive cognitive impairment is a core feature of Huntington’s disease, with early changes in executive function (i.e., processing speed, organization, and planning) rather than learning and memory. Cognitive and associated behavioral changes often precede the emergence of the typical motor abnormalities of bradykinesia (i.e., slowing of voluntary movement) and chorea (i.e., involuntary jerking movements). A diagnosis of definite Huntington’s disease is given in the presence of unequivocal, extrapyramidal motor abnormalities in an individual with either a family history of Huntington’s disease or genetic testing showing a CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the HTT gene, located on chromosome 4.Depression, irritability, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, and apathy are frequently, and psychosis more rarely, associated with Huntington’s disease and often precede the onset of motor symptoms(Duff et al. 2007).Neurocognitive deficits are an eventual outcome of Huntington’s disease; the worldwide prevalence is estimated to be 2.7 per 100,000. The prevalence of Huntington’s disease in North America, Europe, and Australia is 5.7 per 100,000, with a much lower prevalence of 0.40 per 100,000 in Asia(Pringsheim et al. 2012).', '', 'The average age at diagnosis of Huntington’s disease is approximately 40 years, although this varies widely(Foroud et al. 1999). Age at onset is inversely correlated with CAG expansion length(Lee et al. 2012). Juvenile Huntington’s disease (onset before age 20) may present more commonly with bradykinesia, dystonia, and rigidity than with the choreic movements characteristic of the adult-onset disorder. The disease is gradually progressive, with median survival approximately 15 years after motor symptom diagnosis(Roos et al. 1993).', '', 'Phenotypic expression of Huntington’s disease varies by presence of motor, cognitive, and psychiatric symptoms. Psychiatric and cognitive abnormalities can predate the motor abnormality by at least 15 years(Duff et al. 2007; Stout et al. 2011). Initial symptoms requiring care often include irritabity, anxiety, or depressed mood. Other behavioral disturbances may include pronounced apathy, disinhibition, impulsivity, and impaired insight, with apathy often becoming more progressive over time(Thompson et al. 2012). Early movement symptoms may involve the appearance of fidgetiness of the extremities as well as mild apraxia (i.e., difficulty with purposeful movements), particularly with fine motor tasks. As the disorder progresses, other motor problems include impaired gait (ataxia) and postural instability. Motor impairment eventually affects speech production (dysarthria) such that the speech becomes very difficult to understand, which may result in significant distress resulting from the communication barrier in the context of comparatively intact cognition. Advanced motor disease severely affects gait with progressive ataxia. Eventually individuals become nonambulatory. End-stage motor disease impairs motor control of eating and swallowing, typically a major contributor to the death of the individual from aspiration pneumonia.', 'The genetic basis of Huntington’s disease is a fully penetrant autosomal dominant expansion of the CAG trinucleotide, often called a CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene. A repeat length of 36 or more is invariably associated with Huntington’s disease, with longer repeat lengths associated with early age at onset. A CAG repeat length of 36 or more is invariably associated with Huntington’s disease(Groen et al. 2010).Genetic testing is the primary laboratory test for the determination of Huntington’s disease, which is an autosomal dominant disorder with complete penetrance. The trinucleotide CAG is observed to have a repeat expansion in the gene that encodes huntingtin protein on chromosome 4. A diagnosis of Huntington’s disease is not made in the presence of the gene expansion alone, but the diagnosis is made only after symptoms become manifest. Some individuals with a positive family history request genetic testing in a presymptomatic stage. Associated features may also include neuroimaging changes; volume loss in the basal ganglia, particularly the caudate nucleus and putamen, is well known to occur and progresses over the course of illness. Other structural and functional changes have been observed in brain imaging but remain research measures.In the prodromal phase of illness and at early diagnosis, occupational decline is most common, with most individuals reporting some loss of ability to engage in their typical work. The emotional, behavioral, and cognitive aspects of Huntington’s disease, such as disinhibition and personality changes, are highly associated with functional decline(Beglinger et al. 2010). Cognitive deficits that contribute most to functional decline may include speed of processing, initiation, and attention rather than memory impairment(Peavy et al. 2010). Given that Huntington’s disease onset occurs in productive years of life, it may have a very disruptive effect on performance in the work setting as well as social and family life. As the disease progresses, disability from problems such as impaired gait, dysarthria, and impulsive or irritable behaviors may substantially add to the level of impairment and daily care needs, over and above the care needs attributable to the cognitive decline. Severe choreic movements may substantially interfere with provision of care such as bathing, dressing, and toileting.', 'Other mental disorders', '', 'Early symptoms of Huntington’s disease may include instability of mood, irritability, or compulsive behaviors that may suggest another mental disorder. However, genetic testing or the development of motor symptoms will distinguish the presence of Huntington’s disease.', 'Other neurocognitive disorders', '', 'The early symptoms of Huntington’s disease, particularly symptoms of executive dysfunction and impaired psychomotor speed, may resemble other neurocognitive disorders (NCDs), such as major or mild vascular NCD.', 'Other movement disorders', '', 'Huntington’s disease must also be differentiated from other disorders or conditions associated with chorea, such as Wilson’s disease, drug-induced tardive dyskinesia, Sydenham’s chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, or senile chorea. Rarely, individuals may present with a course similar to that of Huntington’s disease but without positive genetic testing; this is considered to be a Huntington’s disease phenocopy that results from a variety of potential genetic factors(Wild et al. 2008).', '', '']