['Voyeuristic Disorder', 'Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.', 'The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', 'The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18 years of age.', 'Specify if:', 'In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in voyeuristic behavior are restricted.', 'In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.', 'The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of voyeurism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted. The diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less freely disclose this paraphilic interest and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, disrobing, or engaged in sexual activity despite substantial objective evidence to the contrary. If disclosing individuals also report distress or psychosocial problems because of their voyeuristic sexual preferences, they could be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. On the other hand, if they declare no distress, demonstrated by lack of anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses and are not impaired in other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as having voyeuristic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder(Långström 2010).', '', 'Nondisclosing individuals include, for example, individuals known to have been spying repeatedly on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior, and who may report that known episodes of watching unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons were all accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of observing unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons but contest any significant or sustained sexual interest in this behavior. Since these individuals deny having fantasies or impulses about watching others nude or involved in sexual activity, it follows that they would also reject feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Despite their nondisclosing stance, such individuals may be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. Recurrent voyeuristic behavior constitutes sufficient support for voyeurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).', '', '“Recurrent” spying on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity (i.e., multiple victims, each on a separate occasion) may, as a general rule, be interpreted as three or more victims on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion if there were multiple occasions of watching the same victim or if there is corroborating evidence of a distinct or preferential interest in secret watching of naked or sexually active unsuspecting persons. Note that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for diagnosis; the criteria may also be met if the individual acknowledges intense voyeuristic sexual interest.', '', 'The Criterion A time frame, indicating that signs or symptoms of voyeurism must have persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understood as a general guideline, not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting naked or sexually active others is not merely transient.', '', 'Adolescence and puberty generally increase sexual curiosity and activity. To alleviate the risk of pathologizing normative sexual interest and behavior during pubertal adolescence, the minimum age for the diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years (Criterion C).', 'Voyeuristic acts are the most common of potentially law-breaking sexual behaviors. The population prevalence of voyeuristic disorder is unknown(Lavin 2008). However, based on voyeuristic sexual acts in nonclinical samples(Långström and Seto 2006), the highest possible lifetime prevalence for voyeuristic disorder is approximately 12% in males and 4% in females.Adult males with voyeuristic disorder often first become aware of their sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting persons during adolescence(Abel et al. 1988). However, the minimum age for a diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years because there is substantial difficulty in differentiating it from age-appropriate puberty-related sexual curiosity and activity. The persistence of voyeurism over time is unclear(Lavin 2008). Voyeuristic disorder, however, per definition requires one or more contributing factors that may change over time with or without treatment: subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness), psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity; psychosocial impairment; and/or the propensity to act out sexually by spying on unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons. Therefore, the course of voyeuristic disorder is likely to vary with age.Voyeurism is a necessary precondition for voyeuristic disorder; hence, risk factors for voyeurism should also increase the rate of voyeuristic disorder.Childhood sexual abuse, substance misuse, and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality have been suggested as risk factors, although the causal relationship to voyeurism is uncertain and the specificity unclear(Långström and Seto 2006). Voyeuristic disorder is very uncommon among females in clinical settings(Mann et al. 2008), while the male-to-female ratio for single sexually arousing voyeuristic acts might be 3:1(Långström and Seto 2006).', '', 'Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting others who are naked or engaging in sexual activity should be lacking.', 'Substance use disorders', '', 'Substance use disorders might involve single voyeuristic episodes by intoxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting persons being naked or engaging in sexual activity. Hence, recurrent voyeuristic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occur also when the individual is not intoxicated suggest that voyeuristic disorder might be present.', 'Known comorbidities in voyeuristic disorder are largely based on research with males suspected of or convicted for acts involving the secret watching of unsuspecting nude or sexually active persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals with voyeuristic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with voyeuristic disorder include hypersexuality(Kafka 2010) and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder (Abel et al. 1988; Bradford et al. 1992; Fedora et al. 1992; Gebhard et al. 1965). Depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Kafka and Hennen 2002); and conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder are also frequent comorbid conditions.', '', '']