['Sexual Masochism Disorder', '', '', '    Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.', '', '    The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '', 'Specify if:', '', '    With asphyxiophilia: If the individual engages in the practice of achieving sexual arousal related to restriction of breathing.', '', 'Specify if:', '', '    In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in masochistic sexual behaviors are restricted.', '', '    In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.', '', 'The diagnostic criteria for sexual masochism disorder are intended to apply to individuals who freely admit to having such paraphilic interests. Such individuals openly acknowledge intense sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors. If these individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, they may be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in pursuing other personal goals, they could be ascertained as having masochistic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder.', '', 'The Criterion A time frame, indicating that the signs or symptoms of sexual masochism must have persisted for at least 6 months, should be understood as a general guideline, not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer is not merely transient. However, the disorder can be diagnosed in the context of a clearly sustained but shorter time period.', 'The extensive use of pornography involving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or', '', 'otherwise made to suffer is sometimes an associated feature of sexual masochism disorder.', 'The population prevalence of sexual masochism disorder is unknown(Hucker 2008; Krueger 2010). In Australia, it has been estimated that 2.2% of males and 1.3% of females had been involved in bondage and discipline, sadomasochism, or dominance and submission in the past 12 months(Richters et al. 2008). Community individuals with paraphilias(Abel et al. 1993) have reported a mean age at onset for masochism of 19.3 years, although earlier ages, including puberty and childhood, have also been reported for the onset of masochistic fantasies(Freund et al. 1995). Very little is known about persistence over time. Sexual masochism disorder per definition requires one or more contributing factors, which may change over time with or without treatment. These include subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness), psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality and sexual impulsivity, and psychosocial impairment. Therefore, the course of sexual masochism disorder is likely to vary with age. Advancing age is likely to have the same reducing effect on sexual preference involving sexual masochism as it has on other paraphilic or normophilic sexual behavior. The functional consequences of sexual masochism disorder are unknown. However, masochists are at risk of accidental death while practicing asphyxiophilia(Hucker 2011) or other autoerotic procedures(Cairns and Ranier 1981). Many of the conditions that could be differential diagnoses for sexual masochism disorder (e.g., transvestic fetishism, sexual sadism disorder, hypersexuality, alcohol and substance use disorders) sometimes occur also as comorbid diagnoses. Therefore, it is necessary to carefully evaluate the evidence for sexual masochism disorder, keeping the possibility of other paraphilias or other mental disorders as part of the differential diagnosis. Sexual masochism in the absence of distress (i.e., no disorder) is also included in the differential, as individuals who conduct the behaviors may be satisfied with their masochistic interest.Known comorbidities with sexual masochism disorder are largely based on individuals in treatment(Hucker 2008). Disorders that occur comorbidly with sexual masochism disorder typically include other paraphilic disorders(Abel et al. 1988; Bradford et al. 1992), such as transvestic fetishism (Freund et al. 1995).', '', '']