['Sexual Sadism Disorder', '', '', '    Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the physical or psychological suffering of another person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.', '', '    The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '', 'Specify if:', '', '    In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in sadistic sexual behaviors are restricted.', '', '    In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.', 'The diagnostic criteria for sexual sadism disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who freely admit to having such paraphilic interests and to those who deny any sexual interest in the physical or psychological suffering of another individual despite substantial objective evidence to the contrary. Individuals who openly acknowledge intense sexual interest in the physical or psychological suffering of others are referred to as “admitting individuals.” If these individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for the physical or psychological suffering of another individual, they may be diagnosed with sexual sadism disorder. In contrast, if admitting individuals declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in pursuing other goals, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories indicate that they do not act on them, then they could be ascertained as having sadistic sexual interest but they would not meet criteria for sexual sadism disorder.', '', 'Examples of individuals who deny any interest in the physical or psychological suffering of another individual include individuals known to have inflicted pain or suffering on multiple victims on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies about such sexual behavior and who may further claim that known episodes of sexual assault were either unintentional or nonsexual. Others may admit past episodes of sexual behavior involving the infliction of pain or suffering on a nonconsenting individual but do not report any significant or sustained sexual interest in the physical or psychological suffering of another individual. Since these individuals deny having urges or fantasies involving sexual arousal to pain and suffering, it follows that they would also deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Such individuals may be diagnosed with sexual sadism disorder despite their negative self-report. Their recurrent behavior constitutes clinical support for the presence of the paraphilia of sexual sadism (by satisfying Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that their paraphilically motivated behavior is causing clinically significant distress, harm, or risk of harm to others (satisfying Criterion B).', '', '“Recurrent” sexual sadism involving nonconsenting others (i.e., multiple victims, each on a separate occasion) may, as general rule, be interpreted as three or more victims on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion, if there are multiple instances of infliction of pain and suffering to the same victim, or if there is corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in pain and suffering involving multiple victims. Note that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for diagnosis, as the criteria may be met if the individual acknowledges intense sadistic sexual interest.', '', 'The Criterion A time frame, indicating that the signs or symptoms of sexual sadism must have persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understood as a general guideline, not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in inflicting pain and suffering on nonconsenting victims is not merely transient. However, the diagnosis may be met if there is a clearly sustained but shorter period of sadistic behaviors.', 'The extensive use of pornography involving the infliction of pain and suffering is sometimes an associated feature of sexual sadism disorder.The population prevalence of sexual sadism disorder is unknown(Yates et al. 2008) and is largely based on individuals in forensic settings. Depending on the criteria for sexual sadism, prevalence varies widely, from 2% to 30%(Krueger 2010). Among civilly committed sexual offenders in the United States, less than 10% have sexual sadism. Among individuals who have committed sexually motivated homicides, rates of sexual sadism disorder range from 37% to 75%(Krueger 2010). Individuals with sexual sadism in forensic samples are almost exclusively male(Krueger 2010), but a representative sample of the population in Australia reported that 2.2% of men and 1.3% of women said they had been involved in bondage and discipline, “sadomasochism,” or dominance and submission in the previous year(Richters et al. 2008). Information on the development and course of sexual sadism disorder is extremely limited. One study(Levitt et al. 1994) reported that females became aware of their sadomasochistic interest as young adults, and another(Abel et al. 1988) reported that the mean age at onset of sadism in a group of males was 19.4 years. Whereas sexual sadism per se is probably a lifelong characteristic, sexual sadism disorder may fluctuate according to the individual’s subjective distress or his or her propensity to harm nonconsenting others. Advancing age is likely to have the same reducing effect on this disorder as it has on other paraphilic or normophilic sexual behavior.Many of the conditions that could be differential diagnoses for sexual sadism disorder (e.g., antisocial personality disorder, sexual masochism disorder, hypersexuality, substance use disorders) sometimes occur also as comorbid diagnoses. Therefore, it is necessary to carefully evaluate the evidence for sexual sadism disorder, keeping the possibility of other paraphilias or mental disorders as part of the differential diagnosis. The majority of individuals who are active in community networks that practice sadistic and masochistic behaviors do not express any dissatisfaction with their sexual interests(Weinberg 2006), and their behavior would not meet DSM-5 criteria for sexual sadism disorder. Sadistic interest, but not the disorder, may be considered in the differential diagnosis.Known comorbidities with sexual sadism disorder are largely based on individuals (almost all males) convicted for criminal acts involving sadistic acts against nonconsenting victims. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who never engaged in sadistic activity with a nonconsenting victim but who qualify for a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder based on subjective distress over their sexual interest. Disorders that are commonly comorbid with sexual sadism disorder include other paraphilic disorders(Abel et al. 1988; Bradford et al. 1992).', '', '']