['Fetishistic Disorder', '', '', '    Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on nongenital body part(s), as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.', '', '    The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '', '    The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing used in cross-dressing (as in transvestic disorder) or devices specifically designed for the purpose of tactile genital stimulation (e.g., vibrator).', '', 'Specify:', '', '    Body part(s)', '', '    Nonliving object(s)', '', '    Other', '', 'Specify if:', '', '    In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in fetishistic behaviors are restricted.', '', '    In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.', 'Although individuals with fetishistic disorder may report intense and recurrent sexual arousal to inanimate objects or a specific body part, it is not unusual for non–mutually exclusive combinations of fetishes to occur. Thus, an individual may have fetishistic disorder associated with an inanimate object (e.g., female undergarments) or an exclusive focus on an intensely eroticized body part (e.g., feet, hair), or their fetishistic interest may meet criteria for various combinations of these specifiers (e.g., socks, shoes and feet).', '', 'The paraphilic focus of fetishistic disorder involves the persistent and repetitive use of or dependence on nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a (typically nongenital) body part as primary elements associated with sexual arousal (Criterion A). A diagnosis of fetishistic disorder must include clinically significant personal distress or psychosocial role impairment (Criterion B). Common fetish objects include female undergarments, male or female footwear, rubber articles, leather clothing, or other wearing apparel. Highly eroticized body parts associated with fetishistic disorder include feet, toes, and hair. It is not uncommon for sexualized fetishes to include both inanimate objects and body parts (e.g., dirty socks and feet)(Gosselin and Wilson 1980; Junginger 1997; Scorolli et al. 2007; Weinberg et al. 1994), and for this reason the definition of fetishistic disorder now re-incorporates partialism (i.e., an exclusive focus on a body part) into its boundaries. Partialism, previously considered a paraphilia not otherwise specified disorder, had historically been subsumed in fetishism prior to DSM-III(Kafka 2010).', '', 'Many individuals who self-identify as fetishist practitioners do not necessarily report clinical impairment in association with their fetish-associated behaviors(Chalkley and Powell 1983; Gosselin and Wilson 1980; Scorolli et al. 2007; Weinberg et al. 1994). Such individuals could be considered as having a fetish but not fetishistic disorder. A diagnosis of fetishistic disorder requires concurrent fulfillment of both the behaviors in Criterion A and the clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning noted in Criterion B.', 'Fetishistic disorder can be a multisensory experience, including holding, tasting, rubbing, inserting, or smelling the fetish object while masturbating, or preferring that a sexual partner wear or utilize a fetish object during sexual encounters(Chalkley and Powell 1983; Gosselin and Wilson 1980; Scorolli et al. 2007; Weinberg et al. 1994). Some individuals may acquire extensive collections of highly desired fetish objects.Usually paraphilias have an onset during puberty, but fetishes can develop prior to adolescence. Once established, fetishistic disorder tends to have a continuous course that fluctuates in intensity and frequency of urges or behavior. Knowledge of and appropriate consideration for normative aspects of sexual behavior are important factors to explore to establish a clinical diagnosis of fetishistic disorder and to distinguish a clinical diagnosis from a socially acceptable sexual behavior.Fetishistic disorder has not been systematically reported to occur in females. In clinical samples, fetishistic disorder is nearly exclusively reported in males.', '', 'Typical impairments associated with fetishistic disorder include sexual dysfunction during romantic reciprocal relationships when the preferred fetish object or body part is unavailable during foreplay or coitus. Some individuals with fetishistic disorder may prefer solitary sexual activity associated with their fetishistic preference(s) even while involved in a meaningful reciprocal and affectionate relationship.', '', 'Although fetishistic disorder is relatively uncommon among arrested sexual offenders with paraphilias(Abel and Osborn 1992; Gebhard et al. 1965a; Gebhard et al. 1965b), males with fetishistic disorder may steal and collect their particular fetishistic objects of desire(Chalkley and Powell 1983; Gebhard et al. 1965b). Such individuals have been arrested and charged for nonsexual antisocial behaviors (e.g., breaking and entering, theft, burglary) that are primarily motivated by the fetishistic disorder.', 'Transvestic disorder', '', 'The nearest diagnostic neighbor of fetishistic disorder is transvestic disorder. As noted in the diagnostic criteria, fetishistic disorder is not diagnosed when fetish objects are limited to articles of clothing exclusively worn during cross-dressing (as in transvestic disorder), or when the object is genitally stimulating because it has been designed for that purpose (e.g., a vibrator).', 'Sexual masochism disorder or other paraphilic disorders', '', 'Fetishes can co-occur with other paraphilic disorders, especially “sadomasochism”(Gosselin and Wilson 1980; Weinberg et al. 1994) and transvestic disorder(Freund et al. 1996; Wilson and Gosselin 1980). When an individual fantasizes about or engages in “forced cross-dressing” and is primarily sexually aroused by the domination or humiliation associated with such fantasy or repetitive activity, the diagnosis of sexual masochism disorder should be made.', 'Fetishistic behavior without fetishistic disorder', '', 'Use of a fetish object for sexual arousal without any associated distress or psychosocial role impairment or other adverse consequence would not meet criteria for fetishistic disorder, as the threshold required by Criterion B would not be met. For example, an individual whose sexual partner either shares or can successfully incorporate his interest in caressing, smelling, or licking feet or toes as an important element of foreplay would not be diagnosed with fetishistic disorder; nor would an individual who prefers, and is not distressed or impaired by, solitary sexual behavior associated with wearing rubber garments or leather boots.', 'Fetishistic disorder may co-occur with other paraphilic disorders as well as hypersexuality. Rarely, fetishistic disorder may be associated with neurological conditions.', '', '']