['Narcolepsy', 'Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or napping occurring within the same day. These must have been occurring at least three times per week over the past 3 months.', 'The presence of at least one of the following:', 'Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at least a few times per month:', 'In individuals with long-standing disease, brief (seconds to minutes) episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone with maintained consciousness that are precipitated by laughter or joking.', 'In children or in individuals within 6 months of onset, spontaneous grimaces or jaw-opening episodes with tongue thrusting or a global hypotonia, without any obvious emotional triggers.', 'Hypocretin deficiency, as measured using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one-third of values obtained in healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or less than or equal to 110 pg/mL). Low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 must not be observed in the context of acute brain injury, inflammation, or infection.', 'Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep latency less than or equal to 15 minutes, or a multiple sleep latency test showing a mean sleep latency less than or equal to 8 minutes and two or more sleep-onset REM periods.', 'Specify whether:', 'Narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency: Criterion B requirements of low CSF hypocretin-1 levels and positive polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but no cataplexy is present (Criterion B1 not met).', 'Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency: In this rare subtype (less than 5% of narcolepsy cases), Criterion B requirements of cataplexy and positive polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but CSF hypocretin-1 levels are normal (Criterion B2 not met).', 'Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy: This subtype is caused by exon 21 DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase-1 mutations and is characterized by late-onset (age 30–40 years) narcolepsy (with low or intermediate CSF hypocretin-1 levels), deafness, cerebellar ataxia, and eventually dementia.', 'Autosomal dominant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes: Narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes and low CSF hypocretin-1 levels have been described in rare cases and are associated with a mutation in the myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein gene.', 'Narcolepsy secondary to another medical condition: This subtype is for narcolepsy that develops secondary to medical conditions that cause infectious (e.g., Whipple’s disease, sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral destruction of hypocretin neurons.', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Infrequent cataplexy (less than once per week), need for naps only once or twice per day, and less disturbed nocturnal sleep.', 'Moderate: Cataplexy once daily or every few days, disturbed nocturnal sleep, and need for multiple naps daily.', 'Severe: Drug-resistant cataplexy with multiple attacks daily, nearly constant sleepiness, and disturbed nocturnal sleep (i.e., movements, insomnia, and vivid dreaming).', 'In narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency, unclear “cataplexy-like” symptoms may be reported (e.g., the symptoms are not triggered by emotions and are unusually long lasting). In extremely rare cases, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of hypocretin-1 are low, and polysomnographic/multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) results are negative: repeating the test is advised before establishing the subtype diagnosis. In narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency, test results for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DQB1*06:02 may be negative. Seizures, falls of other origin, and conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) should be excluded. In narcolepsy secondary to infectious (e.g., Whipple’s disease, sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral destruction of hypocretin neurons, test results for HLA DQB1*06:02 may be positive and may result from the insult triggering the autoimmune process. In other cases, the destruction of hypocretin neurons may be secondary to trauma or hypothalamic surgery. Head trauma or infections of the central nervous system can, however, produce transitory decreases in CSF hypocretin-1 levels without hypocretin cell loss, complicating the diagnosis.', 'The essential features of sleepiness in narcolepsy are recurrent daytime naps or lapses into sleep. Sleepiness typically occurs daily but must occur at a minimum three times a week for at least 3 months (Criterion A). Narcolepsy generally produces cataplexy, which most commonly presents as brief episodes (seconds to minutes) of sudden, bilateral loss of muscle tone precipitated by emotions, typically laughing and joking. Muscles affected may include those of the neck, jaw, arms, legs, or whole body, resulting in head bobbing, jaw dropping, or complete falls. Individuals are awake and aware during cataplexy. To meet Criterion B1(a), cataplexy must be triggered by laughter or joking and must occur at least a few times per month when the condition is untreated or in the past(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Cataplexy should not be confused with “weakness” occurring in the context of athletic activities (physiological) or exclusively after unusual emotional triggers such as stress or anxiety (suggesting possible psychopathology). Episodes lasting hours or days, or those not triggered by emotions, are unlikely to be cataplexy, nor is rolling on the floor while laughing hysterically(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'In children close to onset, genuine cataplexy can be atypical, affecting primarily the face, causing grimaces or jaw opening with tongue thrusting (“cataplectic faces”). Alternatively, cataplexy may present as low-grade continuous hypotonia, yielding a wobbling walk. In these cases, Criterion B1(b) can be met in children or in individuals within 6 months of a rapid onset(Bassetti et al. 2007).', 'Narcolepsy-cataplexy nearly always results from the loss of hypothalamic hypocretin (orexin)–producing cells, causing hypocretin deficiency (less than or equal to one-third of control values, or 110 pg/mL in most laboratories). Cell loss is likely autoimmune, and approximately 99% of affected individuals carry HLA-DQB1*06:02 (vs. 12%–38% of control subjects)(Bourgin et al. 2008). Thus, checking for the presence of DQB1*06:02 prior to a lumbar puncture for evaluation of CSF hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity may be useful. Rarely, low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 occur without cataplexy, notably in youths who may develop cataplexy later. CSF hypocretin-1 measurement represents the gold standard, excepting associated severe conditions (neurological, inflammatory, infectious, trauma) that can interfere with the assay(Bourgin et al. 2008).', 'A nocturnal polysomnographic sleep study followed by an MSLT can also be used to confirm the diagnosis (Criterion B3). These tests must be performed after the individual has stopped all psychotropic medications, following 2 weeks of adequate sleep time (as documented with sleep diaries, actigraphy). Short rapid eye movement (REM) latency (sleep-onset REM period, REM latency less than or equal to 15 minutes) during polysomnography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis and meets Criterion B3. Alternatively, the MSLT result must be positive, showing a mean sleep latency of less than or equal to 8 minutes and two or more sleep-onset REM periods in four to five naps(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'When sleepiness is severe, automatic behaviors may occur, with the individual continuing his or her activities in a semi-automatic, hazelike fashion without memory or consciousness(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007). Approximately 20%–60% of individuals experience vivid hypnagogic hallucinations before or upon falling asleep or hypnopompic hallucinations just after awakening(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007; Ohayon et al. 1996). These hallucinations are distinct from the less vivid, nonhallucinatory dreamlike mentation at sleep onset that occurs in normal sleepers(Ohayon et al. 1996). Nightmares and vivid dreaming are also frequent in narcolepsy, as is REM sleep behavior disorder. Approximately 20%–60% of individuals experience sleep paralysis upon falling asleep or awakening, leaving them awake but unable to move or speak. However, many normal sleepers also report sleep paralysis, especially with stress or sleep deprivation(Ohayon et al. 1999). Nocturnal eating may occur. Obesity is common. Nocturnal sleep disruption with frequent long or short awakenings is common and can be disabling.', 'Individuals may appear sleepy or fall asleep in the waiting area or during clinical examination. During cataplexy, individuals may slump in a chair and have slurred speech or drooping eyelids. If the clinician has time to check reflexes during cataplexy (most attacks are less than 10 seconds), reflexes are abolished—an important finding distinguishing genuine cataplexy from conversion disorder(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Narcolepsy-cataplexy affects 0.02%–0.04% of the general population in most countries(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007). Narcolepsy affects both genders, with possibly a slight male preponderance(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Onset is typically in children and adolescents/young adults but rarely in older adults. Two peaks of onset are suggested, at ages 15–25 years and ages 30–35 years. Onset can be abrupt or progressive (over years). Severity is highest when onset is abrupt in children, and then decreases with age or with treatment, so that symptoms such as cataplexy can occasionally disappear. Abrupt onset in young, prepubescent children can be associated with obesity and premature puberty, a phenotype more frequently observed since 2009. In adolescents, onset is more difficult to pinpoint. Onset in adults is often unclear, with some individuals reporting having had excessive sleepiness since birth. Once the disorder has manifested, the course is persistent and lifelong(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'In 90% of cases, the first symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep, followed by cataplexy (within 1 year in 50% of cases, within 3 years in 85%). Sleepiness, hypnagogic hallucinations, vivid dreaming, and REM sleep behavior disorder (excessive movements during REM sleep) are early symptoms. Excessive sleep rapidly progresses to an inability to stay awake during the day, and to maintain good sleep at night, without a clear increase in total 24-hour sleep needs. In the first months, cataplexy may be atypical, especially in children. Sleep paralysis usually develops around puberty in children with prepubertal onset. Exacerbations of symptoms suggest lack of compliance with medications or development of a concurrent sleep disorder, notably sleep apnea(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Young children and adolescents with narcolepsy often develop aggression or behavioral problems secondary to sleepiness and/or nighttime sleep disruption. Workload and social pressure increase through high school and college, reducing available sleep time at night. Pregnancy does not seem to modify symptoms consistently. After retirement, individuals typically have more opportunity for napping, reducing the need for stimulants. Maintaining a regular schedule benefits individuals at all ages(Bassetti et al. 2007).', 'Temperamental', 'Parasomnias, such as sleepwalking, bruxism, REM sleep behavior disorder, and enuresis, may be more common in individuals who develop narcolepsy. Individuals commonly report that they need more sleep than other family members.', 'Environmental', 'Group A streptococcal throat infection, influenza (notably pandemic H1N1 2009), or other winter infections are likely triggers of the autoimmune process, producing narcolepsy a few months later(Kornum et al. 2011). Head trauma and abrupt changes in sleep-wake patterns (e.g., job changes, stress) may be additional triggers(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Genetic and physiological', 'Monozygotic twins are 25%–32% concordant for narcolepsy. The prevalence of narcolepsy is 1%–2% in first-degree relatives (a 10- to 40-fold increase overall). Narcolepsy is strongly associated with DQB1*06:02 (99% vs. 12%–38% in control subjects of various ethnic groups; 25% in the general U.S. population). DQB1*03:01 increases, while DQB1*05:01, DQB1*06:01, and DQB1*06:03 reduce risk in the presence of DQB1*06:02, but the effect is small. Polymorphisms within the T-cell receptor alpha gene and other immune modulating genes also modulate risk slightly(Bourgin et al. 2008; Kornum et al. 2011).', 'Narcolepsy has been described in all ethnic groups and in many cultures. Among African Americans, more cases present without cataplexy or with atypical cataplexy, complicating diagnosis, especially in the presence of obesity and obstructive sleep apnea(Bassetti et al. 2007).Functional imaging suggests impaired hypothalamic responses to humorous stimuli. Nocturnal polysomnography followed by an MSLT is used to confirm the diagnosis of narcolepsy, especially when the disorder is first being diagnosed and before treatment has begun, and if hypocretin deficiency has not been documented biochemically. The polysomnography/MSLT should be performed after the individual is no longer taking any psychotropic drugs and after regular sleep-wake patterns, without shift work or sleep deprivation, have been documented.A sleep-onset REM period during the polysomnography (REM sleep latency less than or equal to 15 minutes) is highly specific (approximately 1% positive in control subjects) but moderately sensitive (approximately 50%). A positive MSLT result displays an average sleep latency of less than or equal to 8 minutes, and sleep-onset REM periods in two or more naps on a four- or five-nap test. The MSLT result is positive in 90%–95% of individuals with narcolepsy versus 2%–4% of control subjects or individuals with other sleep disorders. Additional polysomnographic findings often include frequent arousals, decreased sleep efficiency, and increased stage 1 sleep. Periodic limb movements (found in about 40% of individuals with narcolepsy) and sleep apnea are often noted(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).Hypocretin deficiency is demonstrated by measuring CSF hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity(Bourgin et al. 2008). The test is particularly useful in individuals with suspected conversion disorder and those without typical cataplexy, or in treatment-refractory cases. The diagnostic value of the test is not affected by medications, sleep deprivation, or circadian time, but the findings are uninterpretable when the individual is severely ill with a concurrent infection or head trauma or is comatose(Bourgin et al. 2008). CSF cytology, protein, and glucose are within normal range even when sampled within weeks of rapid onset. CSF hypocretin-1 in these incipient cases is typically already very diminished or undetectable(Bourgin et al. 2008).Driving and working are impaired, and individuals with narcolepsy should avoid jobs that place themselves (e.g., working with machinery) or others (e.g., bus driver, pilot) in danger. Once the narcolepsy is controlled with therapy, patients can usually drive, although rarely long distances alone. Untreated individuals are also at risk for social isolation and accidental injury to themselves or others. Social relations may suffer as these individuals strive to avert cataplexy by exerting control over emotions(Bassetti et al. 2007; Dauvilliers et al. 2007).', 'Other hypersomnias', 'Hypersomnolence and narcolepsy are similar with respect to the degree of daytime sleepiness, age at onset, and stable course over time but can be distinguished based on distinctive clinical and laboratory features. Individuals with hypersomnolence typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty awakening, more persistent daytime sleepiness (as opposed to more discrete “sleep attacks” in narcolepsy), longer and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or no dreaming during daytime naps. By contrast, individuals with narcolepsy have cataplexy and recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between sleep and wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis). The MSLT typically demonstrates shorter sleep latencies (i.e., greater physiological sleepiness) as well as the presence of multiple sleep-onset REM periods in individuals with narcolepsy.', 'Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep', 'Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep are common in adolescents and shift workers. In adolescents, difficulties falling asleep at night are common, causing sleep deprivation. The MSLT result may be positive if conducted while the individual is sleep deprived or while his or her sleep is phase delayed.', 'Sleep apnea syndromes', 'Sleep apneas are especially likely in the presence of obesity. Because obstructive sleep apnea is more frequent than narcolepsy, cataplexy may be overlooked (or absent), and the individual is assumed to have obstructive sleep apnea unresponsive to usual therapies.', 'Major depressive disorder', 'Narcolepsy or hypersomnia may be associated or confused with depression. Cataplexy is not present in depression. The MSLT results are most often normal, and there is dissociation between subjective and objective sleepiness, as measured by the mean sleep latency during the MSLT.', 'Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)', 'Atypical features, such as long-lasting cataplexy or unusual triggers, may be present in conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). Individuals may report sleeping and dreaming, yet the MSLT does not show the characteristic sleep-onset REM period. Full-blown, long-lasting pseudocataplexy may occur during consultation, allowing the examining physician enough time to verify reflexes, which remain intact.', 'Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or other behavioral problems', 'In children and adolescents, sleepiness can cause behavioral problems, including aggressiveness and inattention, leading to a misdiagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.', 'Seizures', 'In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as seizures. Seizures are not commonly triggered by emotions, and when they are, the trigger is not usually laughing or joking. During a seizure, individuals are more likely to hurt themselves when falling. Seizures characterized by isolated atonia are rarely seen in isolation of other seizures, and they also have signatures on the electroencephalogram.', 'Chorea and movement disorders', 'In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as chorea or pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections, especially in the context of a strep throat infection and high antistreptolysin O antibody levels. Some children may have an overlapping movement disorder close to onset of the cataplexy.', 'Schizophrenia', 'In the presence of florid and vivid hypnagogic hallucinations, individuals may think these experiences are real—a feature that suggests schizophrenia. Similarly, with stimulant treatment, persecutory delusions may develop. If cataplexy is present, the clinician should first assume that these symptoms are secondary to narcolepsy before considering a co-occurring diagnosis of schizophrenia.', 'Narcolepsy can co-occur with bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders, and in rare cases with schizophrenia. Narcolepsy is also associated with increased body mass index or obesity, especially when the narcolepsy is untreated. Rapid weight gain is common in young children with a sudden disease onset. Comorbid sleep apnea should be considered if there is a sudden aggravation of preexisting narcolepsy.The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates five subtypes of narcolepsy.', '', '']