['Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea', 'Either (1) or (2):', 'Evidence by polysomnography of at least five obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep and either of the following sleep symptoms:', 'Nocturnal breathing disturbances: snoring, snorting/gasping, or breathing pauses during sleep.', 'Daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportunities to sleep that is not better explained by another mental disorder (including a sleep disorder) and is not attributable to another medical condition.', 'Evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or hypopneas per hour of sleep regardless of accompanying symptoms.', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Apnea hypopnea index is less than 15.', 'Moderate: Apnea hypopnea index is 15–30.', 'Severe: Apnea hypopnea index is greater than 30.', 'Disease severity is measured by a count of the number of apneas plus hypopneas per hour of sleep (apnea hypopnea index) using polysomnography or other overnight monitoring. Overall severity is also informed by levels of nocturnal desaturation and sleep fragmentation (measured by brain cortical arousal frequency and sleep stages) and degree of associated symptoms and daytime impairment. However, the exact number and thresholds may vary according to the specific measurement techniques used, and these numbers may change over time. Regardless of the apnea hypopnea index (count) per se, the disorder is considered to be more severe when apneas and hypopneas are accompanied by significant oxygen hemoglobin desaturation (e.g., when more than 10% of the sleep time is spent at desaturation levels of less than 90%) or when sleep is severely fragmented as shown by an elevated arousal index (arousal index greater than 30) or reduced stages in deep sleep (e.g., percentage stage N3 [slow-wave sleep] less than 5%).', 'Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is the most common breathing-related sleep disorder. It is characterized by repeated episodes of upper (pharyngeal) airway obstruction (apneas and hypopneas) during sleep. Apnea refers to the total absence of airflow, and hypopnea refers to a reduction in airflow. Each apnea or hypopnea represents a reduction in breathing of at least 10 seconds in duration in adults or two missed breaths in children and is typically associated with drops in oxygen saturation of 3% or greater and/or an electroencephalographic arousal. Both sleep-related (nocturnal) and wake-time symptoms are common. The cardinal symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are snoring and daytime sleepiness.', 'Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in adults is diagnosed on the basis of polysomnographic findings and symptoms. The diagnosis is based on symptoms of 1) nocturnal breathing disturbances (i.e., snoring, snorting/gasping, breathing pauses during sleep), or 2) daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportunities to sleep that are not better explained by another mental disorder and not attributable to another medical condition, along with 3) evidence by polysomnography of five or more obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A1). Diagnosis can be made in the absence of these symptoms if there is evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A2).', 'Specific attention to disturbed sleep occurring in association with snoring or breathing pauses and physical findings that increase risk of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., central obesity, crowded pharyngeal airway, elevated blood pressure) is needed to reduce the chance of misdiagnosing this treatable condition.', 'Because of the frequency of nocturnal awakenings that occur with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, individuals may report symptoms of insomnia. Other common, though nonspecific, symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are heartburn, nocturia, morning headaches, dry mouth, erectile dysfunction, and reduced libido. Rarely, individuals may complain of difficulty breathing while lying supine or sleeping. Hypertension may occur in more than 60% of individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is a very common disorder, affecting at least 1%–2% of children, 2%–15% of middle-age adults, and more than 20% of older individuals(Doghramji 2008; Punjabi 2008; Young et al. 2002). In the general community, prevalence rates of undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be very high in elderly individuals(Martin et al. 2002). Since the disorder is strongly associated with obesity, increases in obesity rates are likely to be accompanied by an increased prevalence of this disorder. Prevalence may be particularly high among males, older adults, and certain racial/ethnic groups. In adults, the male-to-female ratio of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea ranges from 2:1 to 4:1. Gender differences decline in older age, possibly because of an increased prevalence in females after menopause. There is no gender difference among prepubertal children.', 'The age distribution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea likely follows a J-shaped distribution. There is a peak in children ages 3–8 years when the nasopharynx may be compromised by a relatively large mass of tonsillar tissue compared with the size of the upper airway. With growth of the airway and regression of lymphoid tissue during later childhood, there is reduction in prevalence. Then, as obesity prevalence increases in midlife and females enter menopause, obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea again increases. The course in older age is unclear; the disorder may level off after age 65 years, but in other individuals, prevalence may increase with aging. Because there is some age dependency of the occurrence of apneas and hypopneas, polysomnographic results must be interpreted in light of other clinical data. In particular, significant clinical symptoms of insomnia or hypersomnia should be investigated regardless of the individual’s age.', 'Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea usually has an insidious onset, gradual progression, and persistent course. Typically the loud snoring has been present for many years, often since childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead the individual to seek evaluation. Weight gain may precipitate an increase in symptoms. Although obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can occur at any age, it most commonly manifests among individuals ages 40–60 years. Over 4–5 years, the average apnea hypopnea index increases in adults and older individuals by approximately two apneas/hypopneas per hour. The apnea hypopnea index is increased and incident obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is greater among individuals who are older, who are male, or who have a higher baseline body mass index (BMI) or increase their BMI over time. Spontaneous resolution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has been reported with weight loss, particularly after bariatric surgery. In children, seasonal variation in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has been observed, as has improvement with overall growth.', 'In young children, the signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be more subtle than in adults, making diagnosis more difficult to establish(Marcus 1997). Polysomnography is useful in confirming diagnosis. Evidence of fragmentation of sleep on the polysomnogram may not be as apparent as in studies of older individuals, possibly because of the high homeostatic drive in young individuals. Symptoms such as snoring are usually parent-reported and thus have reduced sensitivity. Agitated arousals and unusual sleep postures, such as sleeping on the hands and knees, may occur. Nocturnal enuresis also may occur and should raise the suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at night. Children may also manifest excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as common or pronounced as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor speech articulation are also common features in children. Children younger than 5 years more often present with nighttime symptoms, such as observed apneas or labored breathing, than with behavioral symptoms (i.e., the nighttime symptoms are more noticeable and more often bring the child to clinical attention). In children older than 5 years, daytime symptoms such as sleepiness and behavioral problems (e.g., impulsivity and hyperactivity), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, learning difficulties, and morning headaches are more often the focus of concern. Children with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may present with failure to thrive and developmental delays(Marcus et al. 1994). In young children, obesity is a less common risk factor, while delayed growth and “failure to thrive” may be present.', 'The major risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are obesity and male gender(Hattori et al. 2009). Others include maxillary-mandibular retrognathia or micrognathia, positive family history of sleep apnea, genetic syndromes that reduce upper airway patency (e.g., Down syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome), adenotonsillar hypertrophy (especially in young children), menopause (in females), and various endocrine syndromes (e.g., acromegaly). Compared with premenopausal females, males are at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, possibly reflecting the influences of sex hormones on ventilatory control and body fat distribution, as well as because of gender differences in airway structure. Medications for mental disorders and medical conditions that tend to induce somnolence may worsen the course of apnea symptoms if these medications are not managed carefully.', 'Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has a strong genetic basis, as evidenced by the significant familial aggregation of the apnea hypopnea index. The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is approximately twice as high among the first-degree relatives of probands with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea as compared with members of control families(Palmer and Redline 2003). One-third of the variance in the apnea hypopnea index is explained by shared familial factors(Patel et al. 2008). Although genetic markers with diagnostic or prognostic value are not yet available for use, eliciting a family history of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should increase the clinical suspicion for the disorder.', 'There is a potential for sleepiness and fatigue to be reported differently across cultures. In some groups, snoring may be considered a sign of health and thus may not trigger concerns. Individuals of Asian ancestry may be at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea despite relatively low BMI, possibly reflecting the influence of craniofacial risk factors that narrow the nasopharynx.Females may more commonly report fatigue rather than sleepiness and may underreport snoring.', 'Polysomnography provides quantitative data on frequency of sleep-related respiratory disturbances and associated changes in oxygen saturation and sleep continuity. Polysomnographic findings in children differ from those in adults in that children demonstrate labored breathing, partial obstructive hypoventilation with cyclical desaturations, hypercapnia and paradoxical movements. Apnea hypopnea index levels as low as 2 are used to define thresholds of abnormality in children.', 'Arterial blood gas measurements while the individual is awake are usually normal, but some individuals can have waking hypoxemia or hypercapnia. This pattern should alert the clinician to the possibility of coexisting lung disease or hypoventilation. Imaging procedures may reveal narrowing of the upper airway. Cardiac testing may show evidence of impaired ventricular function. Individuals with severe nocturnal oxygen desaturation may also have elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit values. Validated sleep measures (e.g., multiple sleep latency test [MSLT], maintenance of wakefulness test) may identify sleepiness.', 'More than 50% of individuals with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea report symptoms of daytime sleepiness. A twofold increased risk of occupational accidents has been reported in association with symptoms of snoring and sleepiness. Motor vehicle crashes also have been reported to be as much as sevenfold higher among individuals with elevated apnea hypopnea index values(Cassel et al. 1996; Findley et al. 2000; Turkington et al. 2001). Clinicians should be cognizant of state government requirements for reporting this disorder, especially in relationship to commercial drivers. Reduced scores on measures of health-related quality of life are common in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, with the largest decrements observed in the physical and vitality subscales(Briones et al. 1996).', 'Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from individuals with primary snoring (i.e., otherwise asymptomatic individuals who snore and do not have abnormalities on overnight polysomnography). Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may additionally report nocturnal gasping and choking. The presence of sleepiness or other daytime symptoms not explained by other etiologies suggests the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, but this differentiation requires polysomnography. Definitive differential diagnosis between hypersomnia, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also requires polysomnographic studies.', 'Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from other causes of sleepiness, such as narcolepsy, hypersomnia, and circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can be differentiated from narcolepsy by the absence of cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paralysis and by the presence of loud snoring, gasping during sleep, or observed apneas in sleep. Daytime sleep episodes in narcolepsy are characteristically shorter, more refreshing, and more often associated with dreaming. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea shows characteristic apneas and hypopneas and oxygen desaturation during nocturnal polysomnographic studies. Narcolepsy results in multiple sleep-onset rapid eye movement (REM) periods during the MSLT. Narcolepsy, like obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, may be associated with obesity, and some individuals have concurrent narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. A diagnosis of narcolepsy does not exclude the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as the two conditions may co-occur.', 'For individuals complaining of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep or early-morning awakenings, insomnia disorder can be differentiated from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea by the absence of snoring and the absence of the history, signs, and symptoms characteristic of the latter disorder. However, insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may coexist, and if so, both disorders may need to be addressed concurrently to improve sleep.Nocturnal panic attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking during sleep that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. However, the lower frequency of episodes, intense autonomic arousal, and lack of excessive sleepiness differentiate nocturnal panic attacks from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Polysomnography in individuals with nocturnal panic attacks does not reveal the typical pattern of apneas or oxygen desaturation characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea do not provide a history of daytime panic attacks. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children may include symptoms of inattention, academic impairment, hyperactivity, and internalizing behaviors, all of which may also be symptoms of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. The presence of other symptoms and signs of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., labored breathing or snoring during sleep and adenotonsillar hypertrophy) would suggest the presence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may commonly co-occur, and there may be causal links between them; therefore, risk factors such as enlarged tonsils, obesity, or a family history of sleep apnea may help alert the clinician to their co-occurrence.Substance use and substance withdrawal (including medications) can produce insomnia or hypersomnia. A careful history is usually sufficient to identify the relevant substance/medication, and follow-up shows improvement of the sleep disturbance after discontinuation of the substance/medication. In other cases, the use of a substance/medication (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, tobacco) has been shown to exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. An individual with symptoms and signs consistent with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should receive that diagnosis, even in the presence of concurrent substance use that is exacerbating the condition.', 'Systemic hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, stroke, diabetes, and increased mortality are consistently associated with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Risk estimates vary from 30% to as much as 300% for moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (Gottlieb et al. 2010; Punjabi et al. 2009; Redline et al. 2010). Evidence of pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure (e.g., cor pulmonale, ankle edema, hepatic congestion) are rare in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and when present indicate either very severe disease or associated hypoventilation or cardiopulmonary comorbidities. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may occur with increased frequency in association with a number of medical or neurological conditions (e.g., cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson’s disease). Physical findings reflect the co-occurrence of these conditions.', 'As many as one-third of individuals referred for evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea report symptoms of depression, with as many of 10% having depression scores consistent with moderate to severe depression(Harris et al. 2009). Severity of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as measured by the apnea hypopnea index, has been found to be correlated with severity of symptoms of depression(Aloia et al. 2005). This association may be stronger in males than in females.', 'The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates 11 subtypes of “sleep-related breathing disorders,” including primary central sleep apnea, obstructive sleep apnea, and sleep-related hypoventilation.', '', '']