['Central Sleep Apnea', 'Evidence by polysomnography of five or more central apneas per hour of sleep.', 'The disorder is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.', 'Specify whether:', 'Idiopathic central sleep apnea: Characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort but without evidence of airway obstruction.', 'Cheyne-Stokes breathing: A pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas at a frequency of at least five events per hour, accompanied by frequent arousal.', 'Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use: The pathogenesis of this subtype is attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as well as the differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapnic respiratory drive.', 'Specify current severity:', 'Severity of central sleep apnea is graded according to the frequency of the breathing disturbances as well as the extent of associated oxygen desaturation and sleep fragmentation that occur as a consequence of repetitive respiratory disturbances.', 'Subtypes', 'Idiopathic central sleep apnea and Cheyne-Stokes breathing are characterized by increased gain of the ventilatory control system, also referred to as high loop gain, which leads to instability in ventilation and PaCO2 levels. This instability is termed periodic breathing and can be recognized by hyperventilation alternating with hypoventilation. Individuals with these disorders typically have pCO2 levels while awake that are slightly hypocapneic or normocapneic(Eckert et al. 2009). Central sleep apnea may also manifest during initiation of treatment of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or may occur in association with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome (termed complex sleep apnea). The occurrence of central sleep apnea in association with obstructive sleep apnea is also considered to be due to high loop gain. In contrast, the pathogenesis of central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as well as to its differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapneic respiratory drive. These individuals may have elevated pCO2 levels while awake. Individuals receiving chronic methadone maintenance therapy have been noted to have increased somnolence and depression, although the role of breathing disorders associated with opioid medication in causing these problems has not been studied(Wang and Teichtahl 2007).', 'Specifiers', 'An increase in the central apnea index (i.e., number of central apneas per hour of sleep) reflects an increase in severity of central sleep apnea. Sleep continuity and quality may be markedly impaired with reductions in restorative stages of non–rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (i.e., decreased slow-wave sleep [stage N3]). In individuals with severe Cheyne-Stokes breathing, the pattern can also be observed during resting wakefulness, a finding that is thought to be a poor prognostic marker for mortality.', ' Central sleep apnea disorders are characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort. These are disorders of ventilatory control in which respiratory events occur in a periodic or intermittent pattern. Idiopathic central sleep apnea is characterized by sleepiness, insomnia, and awakenings due to dyspnea in association with five or more central apneas per hour of sleep(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). Central sleep apnea occurring in individuals with heart failure, stroke, or renal failure typically have a breathing pattern called Cheyne-Stokes breathing, which is characterized by a pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour that are accompanied by frequent arousals(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). Central and obstructive sleep apneas may coexist; the ratio of central to obstructive apneas/hypopneas may be used to identify which condition is predominant.', 'Alterations in neuromuscular control of breathing can occur in association with medications or substances used in individuals with mental health conditions, which can cause or exacerbate impairments of respiratory rhythm and ventilation. Individuals taking these medications have a sleep-related breathing disorder that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such as sleepiness, confusion, and depression. Specifically, chronic use of long-acting opioid medications is often associated with impairment of respiratory control leading to central sleep apnea.', 'Individuals with central sleep apnea hypopneas can manifest with sleepiness or insomnia(Eckert et al. 2009). There can be complaints of sleep fragmentation, including awakening with dyspnea(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Yumino and Bradley 2008). Some individuals are asymptomatic. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can coexist with Cheyne-Stokes breathing, and thus snoring and abruptly terminating apneas may be observed during sleep.The prevalence of idiopathic central sleep apnea is unknown but thought to be rare. The prevalence of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is high in individuals with depressed cardiac ventricular ejection fraction. In individuals with an ejection fraction of less than 45%, the prevalence has been reported to be 20% or higher(Yumino and Bradley 2008). The male-to-female ratio for prevalence is even more highly skewed toward males than for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Prevalence increases with age, and most patients are older than 60 years. Cheyne-Stokes breathing occurs in approximately 20% of individuals with acute stroke(Parra et al. 2000; Yumino and Bradley 2008). Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use occurs in approximately 30% of individuals taking chronic opioids for nonmalignant pain and similarly in individuals receiving methadone maintenance therapy(Wang et al. 2005; Webster et al. 2008). The onset of Cheyne-Stokes breathing appears tied to the development of heart failure. The Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern is associated with oscillations in heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen desaturation, and elevated sympathetic nervous system activity that can promote progression of heart failure(Yumino and Bradley 2008). The clinical significance of Cheyne-Stokes breathing in the setting of stroke is not known, but Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be a transient finding that resolves with time after acute stroke(Parra et al. 2000). Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been documented with chronic use (i.e., several months)(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). Cheyne-Stokes breathing is frequently present in individuals with heart failure. The coexistence of atrial fibrillation further increases risk, as do older age and male gender(Yumino and Bradley 2008). Cheyne-Stokes breathing is also seen in association with acute stroke and possibly renal failure(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Eckert et al. 2009; Yumino and Bradley 2008). The underlying ventilatory instability in the setting of heart failure has been attributed to increased ventilatory chemosensitivity and hyperventilation due to pulmonary vascular congestion and circulatory delay(Eckert et al. 2009; Yumino and Bradley 2008). Central sleep apnea is seen in individuals taking long-acting opioids.Physical findings seen in individuals with a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern relate to its risk factors. Findings consistent with heart failure, such as jugular venous distension, S3 heart sound, lung crackles, and lower extremity edema, may be present. Polysomnography is used to characterize the breathing characteristics of each breathing-related sleep disorder subtype. Central sleep apneas are recorded when periods of breathing cessation for longer than 10 seconds occur. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is characterized by a pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour that are accompanied by frequent arousals(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). The cycle length of Cheyne-Stokes breathing (or time from end of one central apnea to the end of the next apnea) is about 60 seconds.Idiopathic central sleep apnea has been reported to cause symptoms of disrupted sleep, including insomnia and sleepiness. Cheyne-Stokes breathing with comorbid heart failure has been associated with excessive sleepiness, fatigue, and insomnia, although many individuals may be asymptomatic(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Eckert et al. 2009). Coexistence of heart failure and Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be associated with increased cardiac arrhythmias and increased mortality or cardiac transplantation(Yumino and Bradley 2008). Individuals with central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use may present with symptoms of sleepiness or insomnia.Idiopathic central sleep apnea must be distinguished from other breathing-related sleep disorders, other sleep disorders, and medical conditions and mental disorders that cause sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). This is achieved using polysomnography.', 'Central sleep apnea can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea by the presence of at least five central apneas per hour of sleep. These conditions may co-occur, but central sleep apnea is considered to predominate when the ratio of central to obstructive respiratory events exceeds 50%.', 'Cheyne-Stokes breathing can be distinguished from other mental disorders, including other sleep disorders, and other medical conditions that cause sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue based on the presence of a predisposing condition (e.g., heart failure or stroke) and signs and polysomnographic evidence of the characteristic breathing pattern. Polysomnographic respiratory findings can help distinguish Cheyne-Stokes breathing from insomnia due to other medical conditions. High-altitude periodic breathing has a pattern that resembles Cheyne-Stokes breathing but has a shorter cycle time, occurs only at high altitude, and is not associated with heart failure.', 'Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use can be differentiated from other types of breathing-related sleep disorders based on the use of long-acting opioid medications in conjunction with polysomnographic evidence of central apneas and periodic or ataxic breathing(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). It can be distinguished from insomnia due to drug or substance use based on polysomnographic evidence of central sleep apnea.', 'Central sleep apnea disorders are frequently present in users of long-acting opioids, such as methadone(Wang and Teichtahl 2007; Wang et al. 2005; Webster et al. 2008; Yue and Guilleminault 2010). Individuals taking these medications have a sleep-related breathing disorder that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such as sleepiness, confusion, and depression(Wang and Teichtahl 2007). While the individual is asleep, breathing patterns such as central apneas, periodic apneas, and ataxic breathing may be observed. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may coexist with central sleep apnea, and features consistent with this condition can also be present (see “Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea” earlier in this chapter). Cheyne-Stokes breathing is more commonly observed in association with conditions that include heart failure, stroke, and renal failure(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005) and is seen more frequently in individuals with atrial fibrillation. Individuals with Cheyne-Stokes breathing are more likely to be older, to be male, and to have lower weight than individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.', '', '']