['Sleep-Related Hypoventilation', 'Polysomnograpy demonstrates episodes of decreased respiration associated with elevated CO2 levels. (Note: In the absence of objective measurement of CO2, persistent low levels of hemoglobin oxygen saturation unassociated with apneic/hypopneic events may indicate hypoventilation.)', 'The disturbance is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.', 'Specify whether:', 'Idiopathic hypoventilation: This subtype is not attributable to any readily identified condition.', 'Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation: This subtype is a rare congenital disorder in which the individual typically presents in the perinatal period with shallow breathing, or cyanosis and apnea during sleep.', 'Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation: This subtype occurs as a consequence of a medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder (e.g., interstitial lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, postpolio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, kyphoscoliosis), or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). It also occurs with obesity (obesity hypoventilation disorder), where it reflects a combination of increased work of breathing due to reduced chest wall compliance and ventilation-perfusion mismatch and variably reduced ventilatory drive. Such individuals usually are characterized by body mass index of greater than 30 and hypercapnia during wakefulness (with a pCO2 of greater than 45), without other evidence of hypoventilation. ', 'Specify current severity:', 'Severity is graded according to the degree of hypoxemia and hypercarbia present during sleep and evidence of end organ impairment due to these abnormalities (e.g., right-sided heart failure). The presence of blood gas abnormalities during wakefulness is an indicator of greater severity.', 'Regarding obesity hypoventilation disorder, the prevalence of obesity hypoventilation in the general population is not known but is thought to be increasing in association with the increased prevalence of obesity and extreme obesity.Sleep-related hypoventilation can occur independently or, more frequently, comorbid with medical or neurological disorders, medication use, or substance use disorder(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). Although symptoms are not mandatory to make this diagnosis, individuals often report excessive daytime sleepiness, frequent arousals and awakenings during sleep, morning headaches, and insomnia complaints. Individuals with sleep-related hypoventilation can present with sleep-related complaints of insomnia or sleepiness(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Casey et al. 2007). Episodes of orthopnea can occur in individuals with diaphragm weakness. Headaches upon awakening may be present. During sleep, episodes of shallow breathing may be observed, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or central sleep apnea may coexist. Consequences of ventilatory insufficiency, including pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale (right heart failure), polycythemia, and neurocognitive dysfunction, can be present(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Casey et al. 2007). With progression of ventilatory insufficiency, blood gas abnormalities extend into wakefulness. Features of the medical condition causing sleep-related hypoventilation can also be present. Episodes of hypoventilation may be associated with frequent arousals or bradytachycardia. Individuals may complain of excessive sleepiness and insomnia or morning headaches or may present with findings of neurocognitive dysfunction or depression(Casey et al. 2007). Hypoventilation may not be present during wakefulness.Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation in adults is very uncommon. The prevalence of congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is unknown, but the disorder is rare. Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation (i.e., hypoventilation comorbid with other conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], neuromuscular disorders, or obesity) is more common.', 'Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is thought to be a slowly progressive disorder of respiratory impairment(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). When this disorder occurs comorbidly with other disorders (e.g., COPD, neuromuscular disorders, obesity), disease severity reflects the severity of the underlying condition, and the disorder progresses as the condition worsens. Complications such as pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, cardiac dysrhythmias, polycythemia, neurocognitive dysfunction, and worsening respiratory failure can develop with increasing severity of blood gas abnormalities(Casey et al. 2007).', 'Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation usually manifests at birth with shallow, erratic, or absent breathing. This disorder can also manifest during infancy, childhood, and adulthood because of variable penetrance of the PHOX2B mutation. Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation are more likely to have disorders of the autonomic nervous system, Hirschsprung’s disease, neural crest tumors, and characteristic box-shaped face (i.e., the face is short relative to its width)(Weese-Mayer et al. 2010).', 'Ventilatory drive can be reduced in individuals using central nervous system depressants, including benzodiazepines, opiates, and alcohol.', 'Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is associated with reduced ventilatory drive(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005; Casey et al. 2007) due to a blunted chemoresponsiveness to CO2 (reduced respiratory drive; i.e., “won’t breathe”), reflecting underlying neurological deficits in centers governing the control of ventilation(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). More commonly, sleep-related hypoventilation is comorbid with another medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder, a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder, or hypothyroidism, or with use of medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates)(Casey et al. 2007). In these conditions, the hypoventilation may be a consequence of increased work of breathing and/or impairment of respiratory muscle function (i.e., “can’t breathe”) or reduced respiratory drive (i.e., “won’t breathe”)(Casey et al. 2007).', 'Neuromuscular disorders influence breathing through impairment of respiratory motor innervation or respiratory muscle function. They include conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal cord injury, diaphragmatic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, toxic or metabolic myopathies, postpolio syndrome, and Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome(Casey et al. 2007).', 'Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a genetic disorder attributable to mutations of PHOX2B, a gene that is crucial for the development of the embryonic autonomic nervous system and neural crest derivatives(Grigg-Damberger and Wells 2009). Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation show blunted ventilatory responses to hypercapnia, especially in non–rapid eye movement sleep.', 'Gender distributions for sleep-related hypoventilation occurring in association with comorbid conditions reflect the gender distributions of the comorbid conditions. For example, COPD is more frequently present in males and with increasing age. Sleep-related hypoventilation is diagnosed using polysomnography showing sleep-related hypoxemia and hypercapnia that is not better explained by another breathing-related sleep disorder. The documentation of increased arterial pCO2 levels to greater than 55 mmHg during sleep or a 10 mmHg or greater increase in pCO2 levels (to a level that also exceeds 50 mmHg) during sleep in comparison to awake supine values, for 10 minutes or longer, is the gold standard for diagnosis. However, obtaining arterial blood gas determinations during sleep is impractical, and non-invasive measures of pCO2 have not been adequately validated during sleep and are not widely used during polysomnography in adults(Iber et al. 2007). Prolonged and sustained decreases in oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation of less than 90% for more than 5 minutes with a nadir of at least 85%, or oxygen saturation of less than 90% for at least 30% of sleep time) in the absence of evidence of upper airway obstruction are often used as an indication of sleep-related hypoventilation; however, this finding is not specific, as there are other potential causes of hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease(Redline et al. 2007).The consequences of sleep-related hypoventilation are related to the effects of chronic exposure to hypercapnia and hypoxemia. These blood gas derangements cause vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vasculature leading to pulmonary hypertension, which, if severe, can result in right-sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). Hypoxemia can lead to dysfunction of organs such as the brain, blood, and heart, leading to outcomes such as cognitive dysfunction, polycythemia, and cardiac arrhythmias(Casey et al. 2007). Hypercapnia can depress ventilatory drive, leading to progressive respiratory failure. In adults, the idiopathic variety of sleep-related hypoventilation is very uncommon and is determined by excluding the presence of lung diseases, skeletal malformations, neuromuscular disorders, and other medical and neurological disorders or medications that affect ventilation(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). Sleep-related hypoventilation must be distinguished from other causes of sleep-related hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease.Sleep-related hypoventilation can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea based on clinical features and findings on polysomnography. Sleep-related hypoventilation typically shows more sustained periods of oxygen desaturation rather that the periodic episodes seen in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea also show a pattern of discrete episodes of repeated airflow decreases that can be absent in sleep-related hypoventilation.Sleep-related hypoventilation often occurs in association with a pulmonary disorder (e.g., interstitial lung disease, COPD), with a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, post-polio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, obesity, kyphoscoliosis), or, most relevant to the mental health provider, with medication use (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates)(Casey et al. 2007). Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation often occurs in association with autonomic dysfunction and may occur in association with Hirschsprung’s disease. COPD, a disorder of lower airway obstruction usually associated with cigarette smoking, can result in sleep-related hypoventilation and hypoxemia. The presence of coexisting obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is thought to exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercapnia during sleep and wakefulness. The relationship between congenital central alveolar hypoventilation and idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is unclear; in some individuals, idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation may represent cases of late-onset congenital central alveolar hypoventilation.The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), combines sleep-related hypoventilation and sleep-related hypoxemia under the category of sleep-related hypoventilation/hypoxemic syndromes(American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2005). This approach to classification reflects the frequent co-occurrence of disorders that lead to hypoventilation and hypoxemia. In contrast, the classification used in DSM-5 reflects evidence that there are distinct sleep-related pathogenetic processes leading to hypoventilation.figure', '', '']