['Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders', 'A persistent or recurrent pattern of sleep disruption that is primarily due to an alteration of the circadian system or to a misalignment between the endogenous circadian rhythm and the sleep–wake schedule required by an individual’s physical environment or social or professional schedule.', 'The sleep disruption leads to excessive sleepiness or insomnia, or both.', ' The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning.', 'Specify whether:', 'Delayed sleep phase type: A pattern of delayed sleep onset and awakening times, with an inability to fall asleep and awaken at a desired or conventionally acceptable earlier time.', 'Specify if:', 'Familial: A family history of delayed sleep phase is present.', 'Specify if:', 'Overlapping with non-24-hour sleep-wake type: Delayed sleep phase type may overlap with another circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, non-24-hour sleep-wake type.', 'Advanced sleep phase type: A pattern of advanced sleep onset and awakening times, with an inability to remain awake or asleep until the desired or conventionally acceptable later sleep or wake times.', 'Specify if:', 'Familial: A family history of advanced sleep phase is present.', 'Irregular sleep-wake type: A temporally disorganized sleep-wake pattern, such that the timing of sleep and wake periods is variable throughout the 24-hour period.', 'Non-24-hour sleep-wake type: A pattern of sleep-wake cycles that is not synchronized to the 24-hour environment, with a consistent daily drift (usually to later and later times) of sleep onset and wake times.', 'Shift work type: Insomnia during the major sleep period and/or excessive sleepiness (including inadvertent sleep) during the major awake period associated with a shift work schedule (i.e., requiring unconventional work hours).', 'Specify if:', 'Episodic: Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.', 'Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer.', 'Recurrent: Two or more episodes occur within the space of 1 year.', 'The delayed sleep phase type is based primarily on a history of a delay in the timing of the major sleep period (usually more than 2 hours) in relation to the desired sleep and wake-up time, resulting in symptoms of insomnia and excessive sleepiness. When allowed to set their own schedule, individuals with delayed sleep phase type exhibit normal sleep quality and duration for age. Symptoms of sleep-onset insomnia, difficulty waking in the morning, and excessive early day sleepiness are prominent.Common associated features of delayed sleep phase type include a history of mental disorders or a concurrent mental disorder. Extreme and prolonged difficulty awakening with morning confusion is also common. Psychophysiological insomnia may develop as a result of maladaptive behaviors that impair sleep and increase arousal because of repeated attempts to fall asleep at an earlier time.Prevalence of delayed sleep phase type in the general population is approximately 0.17%(Schrader et al. 1993) but appears to be greater than 7% in adolescents(Pelayo et al. 1988). Although the prevalence of familial delayed sleep phase type has not been established, a family history of delayed sleep phase is present in individuals with delayed sleep phase type.', '', 'Course is persistent, lasting longer than 3 months, with intermittent exacerbations throughout adulthood. Although age at onset is variable, symptoms begin typically in adolescence and early adulthood and persist for several months to years before diagnosis is established. Severity may decrease with age. Relapse of symptoms is common.', '', 'Clinical expression may vary across the lifespan depending on social, school, and work obligations. Exacerbation is usually triggered by a change in work or school schedule that requires an early rise time. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the delayed circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms.', '', 'Increased prevalence in adolescence may be a consequence of both physiological and behavioral factors(Crowley et al. 2007). Hormonal changes may be involved specifically, as delayed sleep phase is associated with the onset of puberty(Sadeh et al. 2009). Thus, delayed sleep phase type in adolescents should be differentiated from the common delay in the timing of circadian rhythms in this age group. In the familial form, the course is persistent and may not improve significantly with age.', 'Predisposing factors may include a longer than average circadian period, changes in light sensitivity, and impaired homeostatic sleep drive. Some individuals with delayed sleep phase type may be hypersensitive to evening light, which can serve as a delay signal to the circadian clock(Aoki et al. 2001), or they may be hyposensitive to morning light such that its phase-advancing effects are reduced. Genetic factors may play a role in the pathogenesis of familial and sporadic forms of delayed sleep phase type, including mutations in circadian genes (e.g., PER3, CKIe)(Archer et al. 2003; Takano et al. 2004).Confirmation of the diagnosis includes a complete history and use of a sleep diary or actigraphy (i.e., a wrist-worn motion detector that monitors motor activity for prolonged periods and can be used as a proxy for sleep-wake patterns for at least 7 days). The period covered should include weekends, when social and occupational obligations are less strict, to ensure that the individual exhibits a consistently delayed sleep-wake pattern. Biomarkers such as salivary dim light melatonin onset should be obtained only when the diagnosis is unclear.Excessive early day sleepiness is prominent. Extreme and prolonged difficulty awakening with morning confusion (i.e., sleep inertia) is also common. The severity of insomnia and excessive sleepiness symptoms varies substantially among individuals and largely depends on the occupational and social demands on the individual.', 'Normative variations in sleep', '', 'Delayed sleep phase type must be distinguished from “normal” sleep patterns in which an individual has a late schedule that does not cause personal, social, or occupational distress (most commonly seen in adolescents and young adults).', 'Other sleep disorders', '', 'Insomnia disorder and other circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders should be included in the differential. Excessive sleepiness may also be caused by other sleep disturbances, such as breathing-related sleep disorders, insomnias, sleep-related movement disorders, and medical, neurological, and mental disorders. Overnight polysomnography may help in evaluating for other comorbid sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea. The circadian nature of delayed sleep phase type, however, should differentiate it from other disorders with similar complaints.', 'Delayed sleep phase type is strongly associated with depression, personality disorder, and somatic symptom disorder or illness anxiety disorder(Benca et al. 2009). In addition, comorbid sleep disorders, such as insomnia disorder, restless legs syndrome, and sleep apnea, as well as depressive and bipolar disorders and anxiety disorders, can exacerbate symptoms of insomnia and excessive sleepiness. Delayed sleep phase type may overlap with another circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, non-24-hour sleep-wake type. Sighted individuals with non-24-hour sleep-wake type disorder commonly also have a history of delayed circadian sleep phase. ', 'Advanced sleep phase type may be documented with the specified “familial.” Although the prevalence of familial advanced sleep phase type has not been established, a family history of advanced sleep phase is present in individuals with advanced sleep phase type. In this type, specific mutations demonstrate an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance(Jones et al. 1999; Reid et al. 2001). In the familial form, onset of symptoms may occur earlier (during childhood and early adulthood), the course is persistent, and the severity of symptoms may increase with age.Advanced sleep phase type is characterized by sleep-wake times that are several hours earlier than desired or conventional times. Diagnosis is based primarily on a history of an advance in the timing of the major sleep period (usually more than 2 hours) in relation to the desired sleep and wake-up time, with symptoms of early morning insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness. When allowed to set their schedule, individuals with advanced sleep phase type will exhibit normal sleep quality and duration for age. Individuals with advanced sleep phase type are “morning types,” having earlier sleep-wake times, with the timing of circadian biomarkers such as melatonin and core body temperature rhythms occurring 2–4 hours earlier than normal(Reid and Zee 2004). When required to keep a conventional schedule requiring a delay of bedtime, these individuals will continue to have an early rise time, leading to persistent sleep deprivation and daytime sleepiness. Use of hypnotics or alcohol to combat sleep-maintenance insomnia and stimulants to reduce daytime sleepiness may lead to substance abuse in these individuals. The estimated prevalence of advanced sleep phase type is approximately 1% in middle-age adults(Ando et al. 2002). Sleep-wake times and circadian phase advance in older individuals, probably accounting for increased prevalence in this population.', '', 'Onset is usually in late adulthood. In the familial form, onset can be earlier. The course is typically persistent, lasting more than 3 months, but the severity may increase depending on work and social schedules. The advanced sleep phase type is more common in older adults.', '', 'Clinical expression may vary across the lifespan depending on social, school, and work obligations. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the advanced circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms. Increasing age tends to advance the sleep phase, however, it is unclear whether the common age-associated advanced sleep phase type is due solely to a change in circadian timing (as seen in the familial form) or also to age-related changes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep, resulting in earlier awakening. Severity, remission, and relapse of symptoms suggest lack of adherence to behavioral and environmental treatments designed to control sleep and wake structure and light exposure.', 'Decreased late afternoon/early evening exposure to light and/or exposure to early morning light due to early morning awakening can increase the risk of advanced sleep phase type by advancing circadian rhythms. By going to bed early, these individuals are not exposed to light in the phase delay region of the curve, resulting in perpetuation of advanced phase(Reid and Zee 2004). In familial advanced sleep phase type, a shortening of the endogenous circadian period(Jones et al. 1999) can result in an advanced sleep phase, although circadian period does not appear to systematically decrease with age. Advanced sleep phase type has demonstrated an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, including a PER2 gene mutation causing hypophosphorylation of the PER2 protein and a missense mutation in CKI (Xu et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2007).African Americans may have a shorter circadian period and larger magnitude phase advances to light than do Caucasians, possibly increasing the risk for development of advanced sleep phase type in this population(Smith et al. 2009).A sleep diary and actigraphy may be used as diagnostic markers, as described earlier for delayed sleep phase type.Excessive sleepiness associated with advanced sleep phase can have a negative effect on cognitive performance, social interaction, and safety. Use of wake-promoting agents to combat sleepiness or sedatives for early morning awakening may increase potential for substance abuse.Behavioral factors such as irregular sleep schedules, voluntary early awakening, and exposure to light in the early morning should be considered, particularly in older adults. Careful attention should be paid to rule out other sleep-wake disorders, such as insomnia disorder, and other mental disorders and medical conditions that can cause early morning awakening.Because early morning awakening, fatigue, and sleepiness are prominent features of major depressive disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders must also be considered.Medical conditions and mental disorders with the symptom of early morning awakening, such as insomnia, can co-occur with the advance sleep phase type. The diagnosis of irregular sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of insomnia at night (during the usual sleep period) and excessive sleepiness (napping) during the day. Irregular sleep-wake type is characterized by a lack of discernible sleep-wake circadian rhythm. There is no major sleep period, and sleep is fragmented into at least three periods during the 24-hour day. Individuals with irregular sleep-wake type typically present with insomnia or excessive sleepiness, depending on the time of day. Sleep and wake periods across 24 hours are fragmented, although the longest sleep period tends to occur between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and is usually less than 4 hours. A history of isolation or reclusion may occur in association with the disorder and contribute to the symptoms via a lack of external stimuli to help entrain a normal pattern. Individuals or their caregivers report frequent naps throughout the day. Irregular sleep-wake type is most commonly associated with neurodegenerative disorders, such as major neurocognitive disorder, and many neurodevelopmental disorders in children. ', 'Prevalence of irregular sleep-wake type in the general population is unknown. The course of irregular sleep-wake type is persistent. Age at onset is variable, but the disorder is more common in older adults. Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders in children increase the risk for irregular sleep-wake typeDecreased exposure to environmental light and structured daytime activity can be associated with a low-amplitude circadian rhythm. Hospitalized individuals are especially prone to such weak external entraining stimuli, and even outside the hospital setting, individuals with major neurocognitive disorder (i.e., dementia) are exposed to significantly less bright light(McCurry and Ancoli-Israel 2003; Shochat et al. 2000). A detailed sleep history and a sleep diary (by a caregiver) or actigraphy help confirm the irregular sleep-wake pattern.Lack of a clearly discernible major sleep and wake period in irregular sleep-wake type results in insomnia or excessive sleepiness, depending on the time of day. Disruption of the caregiver’s sleep also often occurs and is an important consideration.Irregular sleep-wake type should be distinguished from a voluntary irregular sleep-wake schedule and poor sleep hygiene, which can result in insomnia and excessive sleepiness.Other causes of insomnia and daytime sleepiness, including comorbid medical conditions and mental disorders or medication, should be considered. Irregular sleep-wake type is often comorbid with neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders, such as major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), and traumatic brain injury(Zee and Vitiello 2009). It is also comorbid with other medical conditions and mental disorders in which there is social isolation and/or lack of light and structured activities. The diagnosis of non-24-hour sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of insomnia or excessive sleepiness related to abnormal synchronization between the 24-hour light-dark cycle and the endogenous circadian rhythm. Individuals typically present with periods of insomnia, excessive sleepiness, or both, which alternate with short asymptomatic periods. Starting with the asymptomatic period, when the individual’s sleep phase is aligned to the external environment, sleep latency will gradually increase and the individual will complain of sleep-onset insomnia. As the sleep phase continues to drift so that sleep time is now in the daytime, the individual will have trouble staying awake during the day and will complain of sleepiness. Because the circadian period is not aligned to the external 24-hour environment, symptoms will depend on when an individual tries to sleep in relation to the circadian rhythm of sleep propensity. Non-24-hour sleep-wake type is most common among blind or visually impaired individuals who have decreased light perception. In sighted individuals, there is often a history of delayed sleep phase and of decreased exposure to light and structured social and physical activity. Sighted individuals with non-24-hour sleep-wake type also demonstrate increased sleep duration(Hayakawa et al. 2005; Uchiyama et al. 2002).Prevalence of non-24-hour sleep-wake type in the general population is unclear, but the disorder appears rare in sighted individuals. The prevalence in blind individuals is estimated to be 50%(Sack et al. 1992).', '', 'Course of non-24-hour sleep-wake type is persistent, with intermittent remission and exacerbations due to changes in work and social schedules throughout the lifespan. Age at onset is variable, depending on the onset of visual impairment. In sighted individuals, because of the overlap with delayed sleep phase type, non-24-hour sleep-wake type may develop in adolescence or early adulthood. Remission and relapse of symptoms in blind and sighted individuals largely depend on adherence to treatments designed to control sleep and wake structure and light exposure.', '', 'Clinical expression may vary across the lifespan depending on social, school, and work obligations. In adolescents and adults, irregular sleep-wake schedules and exposure to light or lack of light at critical times of the day can exacerbate the effects of sleep loss and disrupt circadian entrainment. Consequently, symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, and school, professional, and interpersonal functioning may worsen.', 'In sighted individuals, decreased exposure or sensitivity to light and social and physical activity cues may contribute to a free-running circadian rhythm. With the high frequency of mental disorders involving social isolation and cases of non-24-hour sleep-wake type developing after a change in sleep habits (e.g., night shift work, job loss), behavioral factors in combination with physiological tendency may precipitate and perpetuate this disorder in sighted individuals. Hospitalized individuals with neurological and psychiatric disorders can become insensitive to social cues, predisposing them to the development of non-24-hour sleep-wake typeBlindness is a risk factor for non-24-hour sleep-wake type. Non-24-hour sleep-wake type has been associated with traumatic brain injury(Ayalon et al. 2007).Diagnosis is confirmed by history and sleep diary or actigraphy for an extended period. Sequential measurement of phase markers (e.g., melatonin) can help determine circadian phase in both sighted and blind individuals.Complaints of insomnia (sleep onset and sleep maintenance), excessive sleepiness, or both are prominent. The unpredictability of sleep and wake times (typically a daily delay drift) results in an inability to attend school or maintain a steady job and may increase potential for social isolation. In sighted individuals, non-24-hour sleep-wake type should be differentiated from delayed sleep phase type, as individuals with delayed sleep phase type may display a similar progressive delay in sleep period for several days. Depressive symptoms and depressive disorders may result in similar circadian dysregulation and symptoms. Blindness is often comorbid with non-24-hour sleep-wake type, as are depressive and bipolar disorders with social isolation.', 'Diagnosis is primarily based on a history of the individual working outside of the normal 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daytime window (particularly at night) on a regularly scheduled (i.e., non-overtime) basis. Symptoms of excessive sleepiness at work, and impaired sleep at home, on a persistent basis are prominent. Presence of both sets of symptoms are usually required for a diagnosis of shift work type(Sack et al. 2007). Typically, when the individual reverts to a day-work routine, symptoms resolve. Although the etiology is slightly different, individuals who travel across many time zones on a very frequent basis may experience effects similar to those experienced by individuals with shift work type who work rotating shifts. The prevalence of shift work type is unclear, but the disorder is estimated to affect 5%–10% of the night worker population (16%–20% of the workforce)(Akerstedt 2005; Drake et al. 2004). Prevalence rises with advancement into middle-age and beyond (Drake et al. 2004).Shift work type can appear in individuals of any age but is more prevalent in individuals older than 50 years and typically worsens with the passage of time if the disruptive work hours persist. Although older adults may show similar rates of circadian phase adjustment to a change in routine as do younger adults, they appear to experience significantly more sleep disruption as a consequence of the circadian phase shift(Monk 2005).', 'Temperamental', '', 'Predisposing factors include a morning-type disposition, a need for long (i.e., more than 8 hours) sleep durations in order to feel well rested, and strong competing social and domestic needs (e.g., parents of young children). Individuals who are able to commit to a nocturnal lifestyle, with few competing day-oriented demands, appear at lower risk for shift work type.', 'Genetic and physiological', '', 'Because shift workers are more likely than day workers to be obese, obstructive sleep apnea may be present and may exacerbate the symptoms.', 'A history and sleep diary or actigraphy may be useful in diagnosis, as discussed earlier for delayed sleep phase typeIndividuals with shift work type not only may perform poorly at work but also appear to be at risk for accidents both at work and on the drive home(Barger et al. 2005). They may also be at risk for poor mental health (e.g., alcohol use disorder, substance use disorder, depression) and physical health (e.g., gastrointestinal disorders, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer)(Costa 2003). Individuals with a history of bipolar disorder are particularly vulnerable to shift work type–related episodes of mania resulting from missed nights of sleep. Shift work type often results in interpersonal problems.The diagnosis of shift work type, as opposed to the “normal” difficulties of shift work, must depend to some extent on the severity of symptoms and/or level of distress experienced by the individual. Presence of shift work type symptoms even when the individual is able to live on a day-oriented routine for several weeks at a time may suggest the presence of other sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea, insomnia, and narcolepsy, which should be ruled out. Shift work type has been associated with increased alcohol use disorder, other substance use disorders, and depression(Costa 2003). A variety of physical health disorders (e.g., gastrointestinal disorders, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer) have been found to be associated with prolonged exposure to shift work(Scott 2000).The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates nine circadian rhythm sleep disorders, including jet lag type.', '', '']