['Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal Disorders', 'Recurrent episodes of incomplete awakening from sleep, usually occurring during the first third of the major sleep episode, accompanied by either one of the following:', 'Sleepwalking: Repeated episodes of rising from bed during sleep and walking about. While sleepwalking, the individual has a blank, staring face; is relatively unresponsive to the efforts of others to communicate with him or her; and can be awakened only with great difficulty.', 'Sleep terrors: Recurrent episodes of abrupt terror arousals from sleep, usually beginning with a panicky scream. There is intense fear and signs of autonomic arousal, such as mydriasis, tachycardia, rapid breathing, and sweating, during each episode. There is relative unresponsiveness to efforts of others to comfort the individual during the episodes.', 'No or little (e.g., only a single visual scene) dream imagery is recalled.', 'Amnesia for the episodes is present.', 'The episodes cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', 'The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).', 'Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not explain the episodes of sleepwalking or sleep terrors.', 'Specify whether:', 'Sleepwalking type', 'Specify if:', 'With sleep-related eating', 'With sleep-related sexual behavior (sexsomnia)', 'Sleep terror type', 'The essential feature of non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders is the repeated occurrence of incomplete arousals, usually beginning during the first third of the major sleep episode (Criterion A), that typically are brief, lasting 1–10 minutes, but may be protracted, lasting up to 1 hour. The maximum duration of an event is unknown. The eyes are typically open during these events. Many individuals exhibit both subtypes of arousals on different occasions, which underscores the unitary underlying pathophysiology. The subtypes reflect varying degrees of simultaneous occurrence of wakefulness and NREM sleep, resulting in complex behaviors arising from sleep with varying degrees of conscious awareness, motor activity, and autonomic activation.', '', 'The essential feature of sleepwalking is repeated episodes of complex motor behavior initiated during sleep, including rising from bed and walking about (Criterion A1). Sleepwalking episodes begin during any stage of NREM sleep, most commonly during slow-wave sleep and therefore most often occurring during the first third of the night. During episodes, the individual has reduced alertness and responsiveness, a blank stare, and relative unresponsiveness to communication with others or efforts by others to awaken the individual. If awakened during the episode (or on awakening the following morning), the individual has limited recall for the episode. After the episode, there may initially be a brief period of confusion or difficulty orienting, followed by full recovery of cognitive function and appropriate behavior.', '', 'The essential feature of sleep terrors is the repeated occurrence of precipitous awakenings from sleep, usually beginning with a panicky scream or cry (Criterion A2). Sleep terrors usually begin during the first third of the major sleep episode and last 1–10 minutes, but they may last considerably longer, particularly in children. The episodes are accompanied by impressive autonomic arousal and behavioral manifestations of intense fear. During an episode, the individual is difficult to awaken or comfort. If the individual awakens after the sleep terror, little or none of the dream, or only fragmentary, single images, are recalled. During a typical episode of sleep terrors, the individual abruptly sits up in bed screaming or crying, with a frightened expression and autonomic signs of intense anxiety (e.g., tachycardia, rapid breathing, sweating, dilation of the pupils). The individual may be inconsolable and is usually unresponsive to the efforts of others to awaken or comfort him or her. Sleep terrors are also called “night terrors” or “pavor nocturnus.”', '', 'Sleepwalking episodes can include a wide variety of behaviors. Episodes may begin with confusion: the individual may simply sit up in bed, look about, or pick at the blanket or sheet. This behavior then becomes progressively complex. The individual may actually leave the bed and walk into closets, out of the room, and even out of buildings. Individuals may use the bathroom, eat, talk, or engage in more complex behaviors. Running and frantic attempts to escape some apparent threat can also occur. Most behaviors during sleepwalking episodes are routine and of low complexity. However, cases of unlocking doors and even operating machinery (driving an automobile) have been reported. Sleepwalking can also include inappropriate behavior (e.g., commonly, urinating in a closet or wastebasket). Most episodes last for several minutes to a half hour but may be more protracted. Inasmuch as sleep is a state of relative analgesia, painful injuries sustained during sleepwalking may not be appreciated until awakening after the fact.', '', 'There are two “specialized” forms of sleepwalking: sleep-related eating behavior and sleep-related sexual behavior (sexsomnia or sleep sex)(Schenck and Mahowald 1994; Schenck et al. 2007). Individuals with sleep-related eating experience unwanted recurrent episodes of eating with varying degrees of amnesia, ranging from no awareness to full awareness without the ability to not eat. During these episodes, inappropriate foods may be ingested. Individuals with sleep-related eating disorder may find evidence of their eating only the next morning. In sexsomnia, varying degrees of sexual activity (e.g., masturbation, fondling, groping, sexual intercourse) occur as complex behaviors arising from sleep without conscious awareness. This condition is more common in males and may result in serious interpersonal relationship problems or medicolegal consequences(Schenck et al. 2007).', '', 'During a typical episode of sleep terrors, there is often a sense of overwhelming dread, with a compulsion to escape. Although fragmentary vivid dream images may occur, a storylike dream sequence (as in nightmares) is not reported. Most commonly, the individual does not awaken fully, but returns to sleep and has amnesia for the episode on awakening the next morning. Usually only one episode will occur on any one night. Occasionally several episodes may occur at intervals throughout the night. These events rarely arise during daytime naps.', '', 'Isolated or infrequent NREM sleep arousal disorders are very common in the general population(Bjorvatn et al. 2010; Ohayon et al. 1999; Ohayon et al. 2000). From 10% to 30% of children have had at least one episode of sleepwalking, and 2%–3% sleepwalk often. The prevalence of sleepwalking disorder, marked by repeated episodes and impairment or distress, is much lower, probably in the range of 1%–5%. The prevalence of sleepwalking episodes (not sleepwalking disorder) is 1.0%–7.0% among adults, with weekly to monthly episodes occurring in 0.5%–0.7%(Ohayon et al. 1999). The lifetime prevalence of sleepwalking in adults is 29.2%, with a past-year prevalence of sleepwalking of 3.6%(Ohayon et al. 2012).', '', 'The prevalence of sleep terrors in the general population is unknown. The prevalence of sleep terror episodes (as opposed to sleep terror disorder, in which there is recurrence and distress or impairment) is approximately 36.9% at 18 months of age, 19.7% at 30 months of age, and 2.2% in adults(Nguyen et al. 2008; Ohayon et al. 1999).', 'NREM sleep arousal disorders occur most commonly in childhood and diminish in frequency with increasing age. The onset of sleepwalking in adults with no prior history of sleepwalking as children should prompt a search for specific etiologies, such as obstructive sleep apnea, nocturnal seizures, or effect of medication.', 'Environmental', '', 'Sedative use, sleep deprivation, sleep-wake schedule disruptions, fatigue, and physical or emotional stress increase the likelihood of episodes. Fever and sleep deprivation can produce an increased frequency of NREM sleep arousal disorders.', 'Genetic and physiological', '', 'A family history for sleepwalking or sleep terrors may occur in up to 80% of individuals who sleepwalk. The risk for sleepwalking is further increased (to as much as 60% of offspring) when both parents have a history of the disorder.', '', 'Individuals with sleep terrors frequently have a positive family history of either sleep terrors or sleepwalking, with as high as a 10-fold increase in the prevalence of the disorder among first-degree biological relatives. Sleep terrors are much more common in monozygotic twins as compared with dizygotic twins(Nguyen et al. 2008). The exact mode of inheritance is unknown.', '', 'Violent or sexual activity during sleepwalking episodes is more likely to occur in adults. Eating during sleepwalking episodes is more commonly seen in females. Sleepwalking occurs more often in females during childhood but more often in males during adulthood.', '', 'Older children and adults provide a more detailed recollection of fearful images associated with sleep terrors than do younger children, who are more likely to have complete amnesia or report only a vague sense of fear. Among children, sleep terrors are more common in males than in females. Among adults, the sex ratio is even.', '', 'NREM sleep arousal disorders arise from any stage of NREM sleep but most commonly from deep NREM sleep (slow-wave sleep). They are most likely to appear in the first third of the night and do not commonly occur during daytime naps. During the episode, the polysomnogram may be obscured with movement artifact. In the absence of such artifact, the electroencephalogram typically shows theta or alpha frequency activity during the episode, indicating partial or incomplete arousal.', '', 'Polysomnography in conjunction with audiovisual monitoring can be used to document episodes of sleepwalking. In the absence of actually capturing an event during a polysomnographic recording, there are no polysomnographic features that can serve as a marker for sleepwalking. Sleep deprivation may increase the likelihood of capturing an event(Zadra et al. 2008). As a group, individuals who sleepwalk show instability of deep NREM sleep, but the overlap in findings with individuals who do not sleepwalk is great enough to preclude use of this indicator in establishing a diagnosis(Bruni et al. 2008; Pilon et al. 2006). Unlike arousals from REM sleep associated with nightmares, in which there is an increase in heart rate and respiration prior to the arousal, the NREM sleep arousals of sleep terrors begin precipitously from sleep, without anticipatory autonomic changes. The arousals are associated with impressive autonomic activity, with doubling or tripling of the heart rate. The pathophysiology is poorly understood, but there appears to be instability in the deeper stages of NREM sleep. Absent capturing an event during a formal sleep study, there are no reliable polysomnographic indicators of the tendency to experience sleep terrors.', 'Functional Consequences of Non-REM Sleep Arousal Disorders', '', 'For the diagnosis of a NREM sleep arousal disorder to be made, the individual or household members must experience clinically significant distress or impairment, although parasomnia symptoms may occur occasionally in nonclinical populations and would be subthreshold for the diagnosis. Embarrassment concerning the episodes can impair social relationships. Social isolation or occupational difficulties can result. The determination of a “disorder” depends on a number of factors, which may vary on an individual basis and will depend on the frequency of events, potential for violence or injurious behaviors, embarrassment, or disruption/distress of other household members. Severity determination is best made based on the nature or consequence of the behaviors rather than simply on frequency. Uncommonly, NREM sleep arousal disorders may result in serious injury to the individual or to someone trying to console the individual. Injuries to others are confined to those in close proximity; individuals are not “sought out.”(Pressman 2007) Typically, sleepwalking in both children and adults is not associated with significant mental disorders(Guilleminault et al. 1995; Schenck et al. 1989). For individuals with sleep-related eating behaviors, unknowingly preparing or eating food during the sleep period may create problems such as poor diabetes control, weight gain, injury (cuts and burns), or consequences of eating dangerous or toxic inedibles. NREM sleep arousal disorders may rarely result in violent or injurious behaviors with forensic implications(Bornemann et al. 2006).', 'Nightmare disorder', '', 'In contrast to individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders, individuals with nightmare disorder typically awaken easily and completely, report vivid storylike dreams accompanying the episodes, and tend to have episodes later in the night. NREM sleep arousal disorders occur during NREM sleep, whereas nightmares usually occur during REM sleep. Parents of children with NREM sleep arousal disorders may misinterpret reports of fragmentary imagery as nightmares.', 'Breathing-related sleep disorders', '', 'Breathing disorders during sleep can also produce confusional arousals with subsequent amnesia. However, breathing-related sleep disorders are also characterized by characteristic symptoms of snoring, breathing pauses, and daytime sleepiness. In some individuals, a breathing-related sleep disorder may precipitate episodes of sleepwalking.', 'REM sleep behavior disorder', '', 'REM sleep behavior disorder may be difficult to distinguish from NREM sleep arousal disorders. REM sleep behavior disorder is characterized by episodes of prominent, complex movements, often involving personal injury arising from sleep. In contrast to NREM sleep arousal disorders, REM sleep behavior disorder occurs during REM sleep. Individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder awaken easily and report more detailed and vivid dream content than do individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders. They often report that they “act out dreams.”', 'Parasomnia overlap syndrome', '', 'Parasomnia overlap syndrome consists of clinical and polysomnographic features of both sleepwalking and REM sleep behavior disorder (Schenck et al. 2007).', 'Sleep-related seizures', '', 'Some types of seizures can produce episodes of very unusual behaviors that occur predominantly or exclusively during sleep. Nocturnal seizures may closely mimic NREM sleep arousal disorders but tend to be more stereotypic in nature, occur multiple times nightly, and be more likely to occur from daytime naps(Derry et al. 2009). The presence of sleep-related seizures does not preclude the presence of NREM sleep arousal disorders. Sleep-related seizures should be classified as a form of epilepsy.', 'Alcohol-induced blackouts', '', 'Alcohol-induced blackouts may be associated with extremely complex behaviors in the absence of other suggestions of intoxication. They do not involve the loss of consciousness but rather reflect an isolated disruption of memory for events during a drinking episode. By history, these behaviors may be indistinguishable from those seen in NREM sleep arousal disorders.', 'Dissociative amnesia, with dissociative fugue', '', 'Dissociative fugue may be extremely difficult to distinguish from sleepwalking. Unlike all other parasomnias, nocturnal dissociative fugue arises from a period of wakefulness during sleep, rather than precipitously from sleep without intervening wakefulness. A history of recurrent childhood physical or sexual abuse is usually present (but may be difficult to obtain)(Schenck et al. 1989).', 'Malingering or other voluntary behavior occurring during wakefulness', '', 'As with dissociative fugue, malingering or other voluntary behavior occurring during wakefulness arises from wakefulness(Schenck et al. 1989).', 'Panic disorder', '', 'Panic attacks may also cause abrupt awakenings from deep NREM sleep accompanied by fearfulness, but these episodes produce rapid and complete awakening without the confusion, amnesia, or motor activity typical of NREM sleep arousal disorders.', 'Medication-induced complex behaviors', '', 'Behaviors similar to those in NREM sleep arousal disorders can be induced by use of, or withdrawal from, substances or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotics, opiates, cocaine, nicotine, antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressants, chloral hydrate). Such behaviors may arise from the sleep period and may be extremely complex. The underlying pathophysiology appears to be a relatively isolated amnesia(Dolder and Nelson 2008; Hwang et al. 2010). In such cases, substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type, should be diagnosed (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder” later in this chapter).', 'Night eating syndrome', 'The sleep-related eating disorder form of sleepwalking is to be differentiated from night eating syndrome, in which there is a delay in the circadian rhythm of food ingestion and an association with insomnia and/or depression(Howell et al. 2009).', 'In adults, there is an association between sleepwalking and major depressive episodes and obsessive-compulsive disorder (Ohayon et al. 2012). Children or adults with sleep terrors may have elevated scores for depression and anxiety on personality inventories. The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition, includes “confusional arousal” as a NREM sleep arousal disorder.', '', '']