['Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder', 'A prominent and severe disturbance in sleep.', 'There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both (1) and (2):', 'The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication or after withdrawal from or exposure to a medication.', 'The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'The disturbance is not better explained by a sleep disorder that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sleep disorder could include the following:', 'The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced sleep disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).', '', '    The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.', '', '    The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.', '', 'Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.', 'Specify whether:', '', '    Insomnia type: Characterized by difficulty falling asleep or maintaining sleep, frequent nocturnal awakenings, or nonrestorative sleep.', '', '    Daytime sleepiness type: Characterized by predominant complaint of excessive sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long sleep period.', '', '    Parasomnia type: Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.', '', '    Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/medication-induced sleep problem characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly predominates.', '', 'Specify if (see Table in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for diagnoses associated with substance class):', '', '    With onset during intoxication: This specifier should be used if criteria are met for intoxication with the substance/medication and symptoms developed during the intoxication period.', '', '    With onset during discontinuation/withdrawal: This specifier should be used if criteria are met for discontinuation/withdrawal from the substance/medication and symptoms developed during, or shortly after, discontinuation of the substance/medication.', 'The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, bupropion) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., bupropion), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during discontinuation/withdrawal), followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia type, mixed type). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.85 lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. An additional diagnosis of 304.10 severe lorazepam use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.85 alcohol-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type; 292.85 cocaine-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type).', '', 'The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, bupropion) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., bupropion), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.', '', 'When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced sleep disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during discontinuation/withdrawal), followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia type, mixed type). For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced sleep disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F19.982 bupropion-induced sleep disorder, with onset during medication use, insomnia type). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be listed separately (e.g., F10.282 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type; F14.282 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type).', 'The essential feature of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is a prominent sleep disturbance that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion A) and that is judged to be primarily associated with the pharmacological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin exposure) (Criterion B). Depending on the substance involved, one of four types of sleep disturbances is reported. Insomnia type and daytime sleepiness type are most common, while parasomnia type is seen less often. The mixed type is noted when more than one type of sleep disturbance–related symptom is present and none predominates. The disturbance must not be better explained by another sleep disorder (Criterion C). A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from insomnia disorder or a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness by considering onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence of intoxication or withdrawal from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder arises only in association with intoxication or discontinuation/withdrawal states, whereas other sleep disorders may precede the onset of substance use or occur during times of sustained abstinence. As discontinuation/withdrawal states for some substances can be protracted, onset of the sleep disturbance can occur 4 weeks after cessation of substance use, and the disturbance may have features atypical of other sleep disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). The diagnosis is not made if the sleep disturbance occurs only during a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and when the symptoms warrant independent clinical attention.', '', 'During periods of substance/medication use, intoxication, or withdrawal, individuals frequently complain of dysphoric mood, including depression and anxiety, irritability, cognitive impairment, inability to concentrate, and fatigue.', '', 'Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown) substances. Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulant (including cocaine); tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. Some medications that invoke sleep disturbances include adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, and corticosteroids.', 'Alcohol', '', 'Alcohol-induced sleep disorder typically occurs as insomnia type. During acute intoxication, alcohol produces an immediate sedative effect depending on dose, accompanied by increased stages 3 and 4 non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and reduced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Following these initial effects, there may be increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and vivid and anxiety-laden dreams for the remaining sleep period. In parallel, stages 3 and 4 sleep are reduced, and wakefulness and REM sleep are increased. Alcohol can aggravate breathing-related sleep disorder. With habitual use, alcohol continues to show a short-lived sedative effect in the first half of the night, followed by sleep continuity disruption in the second half(Roehrs and Roth 1998). During alcohol withdrawal, there is extremely disrupted sleep continuity, and an increased amount and intensity of REM sleep, associated frequently with vivid dreaming, which in extreme form, constitutes part of alcohol withdrawal delirium. After acute withdrawal, chronic alcohol users may continue to complain of light, fragmented sleep for weeks to years associated with a persistent deficit in slow-wave sleep.', 'Caffeine', '', 'Caffeine-induced sleep disorder produces insomnia in a dose-dependent manner, with some individuals presenting with daytime sleepiness related to withdrawal(Roehrs and Roth 1998).', 'Cannabis', '', 'Acute administration of cannabis may shorten sleep latency, though arousing effects with increments in sleep latency also occur. Cannabis enhances slow-wave sleep and suppresses REM sleep after acute administration. In chronic users, tolerance to the sleep-inducing and slow-wave sleep–enhancing effects develops. Upon withdrawal, sleep difficulties and unpleasant dreams have been reported lasting for several weeks. Polysomnography studies demonstrate reduced slow-wave sleep and increased REM sleep during this phase(Schierenbeck et al. 2008).', 'Opioids', '', 'Opioids may produce an increase in sleepiness and in subjective depth of sleep, and reduced REM sleep, during acute short-term use. With continued administration, tolerance to the sedative effects of opioids develops and there are complaints of insomnia. Consistent with their respiratory depressant effects, opioids exacerbate sleep apnea.', 'Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances', '', 'Sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics (e.g., barbiturates, benzodiazepines receptor agonists, meprobamate, glutethimide, methyprylon) have similar effects as opioids on sleep. During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic drugs produce the expected increase in sleepiness and decrease in wakefulness. Chronic use (particularly of barbiturates and the older nonbarbiturate, nonbenzodiazepine drugs) may cause tolerance with subsequent return of insomnia(Mendelson et al. 2004). Daytime sleepiness may occur. Sedative-hypnotic drugs can increase the frequency and severity of obstructive sleep apnea events. Parasomnias are associated with use of benzodiazepine receptor agonists(Hoque et al. 2009), especially when these medications are taken at higher doses and when they are combined with other sedative drugs. Abrupt discontinuation of chronic sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use can lead to withdrawal but more commonly rebound insomnia, a condition of an exacerbation of insomnia upon drug discontinuation for 1–2 days reported to occur even with short-term use. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs with short durations of action are most likely to produce complaints of rebound insomnia, whereas those with longer durations of action are more often associated with daytime sleepiness. Any sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drug can potentially cause daytime sedation, withdrawal, or rebound insomnia.', 'Amphetamines and related substances and other stimulants', '', 'Sleep disorders induced by amphetamine and related substances and other stimulants are characterized by insomnia during intoxication and excessive sleepiness during withdrawal. During acute intoxication, stimulants reduce the total amount of sleep, increase sleep latency and sleep continuity disturbances, and decrease REM sleep. Slow-wave sleep tends to be reduced. During withdrawal from chronic stimulant use, there is both prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive daytime sleepiness. Multiple sleep latency tests may show increased daytime sleepiness during the withdrawal phase. Drugs like 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; “ecstasy”) and related substances lead to restless and disturbed sleep within 48 hours of intake; frequent use of these compounds is associated with persisting symptoms of anxiety, depression, and sleep disturbances, even during longer-term abstinence(Schierenbeck et al. 2008).', 'Tobacco', '', 'Chronic tobacco consumption is associated primarily with symptoms of insomnia, decreased slow-wave sleep with a reduction of sleep efficiency, and increased daytime sleepiness. Withdrawal from tobacco can lead to impaired sleep. Individuals who smoke heavily may experience regular nocturnal awakenings caused by tobacco craving(Jaehne et al. 2009).', 'Other or unknown substances/medications', '', 'Other substances/medications may produce sleep disturbances, particularly medications that affect the central or autonomic nervous systems (e.g., adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, corticosteroids).', 'Insomnia in children can be identified by either a parent or the child. Often the child has a clear sleep disturbance associated with initiation of a medication but may not report symptoms, although parents observe the sleep disturbances. The use of some illicit substances (e.g., cannabis, ecstasy) is prevalent in adolescence and early adulthood. Insomnia or any other sleep disturbance encountered in this age group should prompt careful consideration of whether the sleep disturbance is due to consumption of these substances. Help-seeking behavior for the sleep disturbance in these age groups is limited, and thus corroborative report may be elicited from a parent, caregiver, or teacher. Older individuals take more medications and are at increased risk for developing a substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. They may interpret sleep disturbance as part of normal aging and fail to report symptoms. Individuals with major neurocognitive disorder (e.g., dementia) are at risk for substance/medication-induced sleep disorders but may not report symptoms, making corroborative report from caregiver(s) particularly important.Risk and prognostic factors involved in substance abuse/dependence or medication use are normative for certain age groups. They are relevant for, and likely applicable to, the type of sleep disturbance encountered (see the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for descriptions of respective substance use disorders).', 'Temperamental', '', 'Substance use generally precipitates or accompanies insomnia in vulnerable individuals. Thus, presence of insomnia in response to stress or change in sleep environment or timing can represent a risk for developing substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. A similar risk may be present for individuals with other sleep disorders (e.g., individuals with hypersomnia who use stimulants).', 'The consumption of substances, including prescribed medications, may depend in part on cultural background and specific local drug regulations. Gender-specific prevalences (i.e., females affected more than males at a ratio of about 2:1) exist for patterns of consumption of some substances (e.g., alcohol). The same amount and duration of consumption of a given substance may lead to highly different sleep-related outcomes in males and females based on, for example, gender-specific differences in hepatic functioning.Each of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorders produces electroencephalographic sleep patterns that are associated with, but cannot be considered diagnostic of, other disorders. The electroencephalographic sleep profile for each substance is related to the stage of use, whether intake/intoxication, chronic use, or withdrawal following discontinuation of the substance. All-night polysomnography can help define the severity of insomnia complaints, while the multiple sleep latency test provides information about the severity of daytime sleepiness. Monitoring of nocturnal respiration and periodic limb movements with polysomnography may verify a substance’s impact on nocturnal breathing and motor behavior. Sleep diaries for 2 weeks and actigraphy are considered helpful in confirming the presence of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. Drug screening can be of use when the individual is not aware or unwilling to relate information about substance intake.While there are many functional consequences associated with sleep disorders, the only unique consequence for substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is increased risk for relapse. The degree of sleep disturbance during alcohol withdrawal (e.g., REM sleep rebound predicts risk of relapse of drinking)(Gann et al. 2001). Monitoring of sleep quality and daytime sleepiness during and after withdrawal may provide clinically meaningful information on whether an individual is at increased risk for relapse.', 'Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal', '', 'Sleep disturbances are commonly encountered in the context of substance intoxication or substance discontinuation/withdrawal. A diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the sleep disturbance is predominant in the clinical picture and is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.', 'Delirium', '', 'If the substance/medication-induced sleep disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium, it is not diagnosed separately.', 'Other sleep disorders', '', 'A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from another sleep disorder if a substance/medication is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms. A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder attributed to a prescribed medication for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its onset while the individual is receiving the medication or during discontinuation, if there is a discontinuation/withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication. Once treatment is discontinued, the sleep disturbance will usually remit within days to several weeks. If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes for the sleep disturbance–related symptoms should be considered. Not infrequently, individuals with another sleep disorder use medications or drugs of abuse to self-medicate their symptoms (e.g., alcohol for management of insomnia). If the substance/medication is judged to play a significant role in the exacerbation of the sleep disturbance, an additional diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced sleep disorder may be warranted.', 'Sleep disorder due to another medical condition', '', 'Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder and sleep disorder associated with another medical condition may produce similar symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, or a parasomnia. Many individuals with other medical conditions that cause sleep disturbance are treated with medications that may also cause sleep disturbances. The chronology of symptoms is the most important factor in distinguishing between these two sources of sleep symptoms. Difficulties with sleep that clearly preceded the use of any medication for treatment of a medical condition would suggest a diagnosis of sleep disorder associated with another medical condition. Conversely, sleep symptoms that appear only after the initiation of a particular medication/substance suggest a substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. If the disturbance is comorbid with another medical condition and is also exacerbated by substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., sleep disorder associated with another medical condition and substance/medication-induced sleep disorder) are given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the sleep disturbance is attributable to a substance/medication or to another medical condition or is primary (i.e., not due to either a substance/medication or another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified sleep-wake disorder or unspecified sleep-wake disorder is indicated.', 'See the “Comorbidity” sections for other sleep disorders in this chapter, including insomnia, hypersomnolence, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, shift work type.The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), lists sleep disorders “due to drug or substance” under their respective phenotypes (e.g., insomnia, hypersomnia).', '', '']