['Delayed Ejaculation', 'Either of the following symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all occasions (approximately 75%–100%) of partnered sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts), and without the individual desiring delay:', 'Marked delay in ejaculation.', 'Marked infrequency or absence of ejaculation.', 'The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.', 'The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.', 'The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.', 'Specify whether:', 'Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became sexually active.', 'Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual function.', 'Specify whether:', 'Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', 'Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'The distinguishing feature of delayed ejaculation is a marked delay in or inability to achieve ejaculation (Criterion A). The man reports difficulty or inability to ejaculate despite the presence of adequate sexual stimulation and the desire to ejaculate. The presenting complaint usually involves partnered sexual activity. In most cases, the diagnosis will be made by self-report of the individual. The definition of “delay” does not have precise boundaries, as there is noconsensus as to what constitutes a reasonable time to reach orgasm or what is unacceptably long for most men and their sexual partners(Waldinger and Schweitzer 2005).', '', 'The man and his partner may report prolonged thrusting to achieve orgasm to the point of exhaustion or genital discomfort and then ceasing efforts. Some men may report avoiding sexual activity because of a repetitive pattern of difficulty ejaculating. Some sexual partners may report feeling less sexually attractive because their partner cannot ejaculate easily.', '', 'In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of delayed ejaculation, given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image; history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different men with this disorder.', 'Prevalence is unclear because of the lack of a precise definition of this syndrome. It is the least common male sexual complaint. Only 75% of men report always ejaculating during sexual activity(Laumann et al. 1999), and less than 1% of men will complain of problems with reaching ejaculation that last more than 6 months(Mercer et al. 2003).Lifelong delayed ejaculation begins with early sexual experiences and continues throughout life(Jern et al. 2010). By definition, acquired delayed ejaculation begins after a period of normal sexual function. There is minimal evidence concerning the course of acquired delayed ejaculation. The prevalence of delayed ejaculation appears to remain relatively constant until around age 50 years, when the incidence begins to increase significantly. Men in their 80s report twice as much difficulty ejaculating as men younger than 59 years(Bacon et al. 2003).Age-related loss of the fast-conducting peripheral sensory nerves and age-related decreased sex steroid secretion may be associated with the increase in delayed ejaculation in men older than 50 years(Richardson and Goldmeir 2006).Complaints of ejaculatory delay vary across countries and cultures. Such complaints are more common among men in Asian populations than in men living in Europe, Australia, or the United States(Laumann et al. 2005). This variation may be attributable to cultural or genetic differences between cultures.Difficulty with ejaculation may contribute to difficulties in conception. Delayed ejaculation is often associated with considerable psychological distress in one or both partners.', '', 'The major differential diagnosis is between delayed ejaculation fully explained by another medical illness or injury and delayed ejaculation with a psychogenic, idiopathic, or combined psychological and medical etiology. A situational aspect to the complaint is suggestive of a psychological basis for the problem (e.g., men who can ejaculate during sexual activity with one sex but not the other; men who can ejaculate with one partner but not another of the same sex; men with paraphilic arousal patterns; men who require highly ritualized activity to ejaculate during partnered sexual activity). Another medical illness or injury may produce delays in ejaculation independent of psychological issues. For example, inability to ejaculate can be caused by interruption of the nerve supply to the genitals, such as can occur after traumatic surgical injury to the lumbar sympathetic ganglia, abdominoperitoneal surgery, or lumbar sympathectomy(McMahon et al. 2004). Ejaculation is thought to be under autonomic nervous system control involving the hypogastric (sympathetic) and pudendal (parasympathetic) nerves. A number of neurodegenerative diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and diabetic and alcoholic neuropathy, can cause inability to ejaculate(Richardson and Goldmeir 2006). Delayed ejaculation should also be differentiated from retrograde ejaculation (i.e., ejaculation into the bladder), which may follow transurethral prostatic resection.', 'Substance/medication use', '', 'A number of pharmacological agents, such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, alpha sympathetic drugs, and opioid drugs, can cause ejaculatory problems(Segraves 2010).', 'Dysfunction with orgasm', '', 'It is important in the history to ascertain whether the complaint concerns delayed ejaculation or the sensation of orgasm, or both. Ejaculation occurs in the genitals, whereas the experience of orgasm is believed to be primarily subjective. Ejaculation and orgasm usually occur together but not always. For example, a man with a normal ejaculatory pattern may complain of decreased pleasure (i.e., anhedonic ejaculation). Such a complaint would not be coded as delayed ejaculation but could be coded as other specified sexual dysfunction or unspecified sexual dysfunction.', 'There is some evidence to suggest that delayed ejaculation may be more common in severe forms of major depressive disorder. ', '', '']