['Female Orgasmic Disorder', 'Presence of either of the following symptoms and experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts):', 'Marked delay in, marked infrequency of, or absence of orgasm.', 'Markedly reduced intensity of orgasmic sensations.', 'The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.', 'The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.', 'The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.', ' Specify whether:', 'Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became sexually active.', 'Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual function.', 'Specify whether:', 'Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', 'Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', 'Specify if:', 'Never experienced an orgasm under any situation.', 'Specify current severity:', 'Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'Female orgasmic disorder is characterized by difficulty experiencing orgasm and/or markedly reduced intensity of orgasmic sensations (Criterion A). Women show wide variability in the type or intensity of stimulation that elicits orgasm. Similarly, subjective descriptions of orgasm are extremely varied, suggesting that it is experienced in very different ways, both across women and on different occasions by the same woman. For a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder, symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts) and have a minimum duration of approximately 6 months. The use of the minimum severity and duration criteria is intended to distinguish transient orgasm difficulties from more persistent orgasmic dysfunction. The inclusion of “approximately” in Criterion B allows for clinician judgment in cases in which symptom duration does not meet the recommended 6-month threshold.', '', 'For a woman to have a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder, clinically significant distress must accompany the symptoms (Criterion C). In many cases of orgasm problems, the causes are multifactorial or cannot be determined. If female orgasmic disorder is deemed to be better explained by another mental disorder, the effects of a substance/medication, or a medical condition, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made. Finally, if interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship distress, intimate partner violence, or other significant stressors, are present, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.', '', 'Many women require clitoral stimulation to reach orgasm, and a relatively small proportion of women report that they always experience orgasm during penile-vaginal intercourse. Thus, a woman’s experiencing orgasm through clitoral stimulation but not during intercourse does not meet criteria for a clinical diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder. It is also important to consider whether orgasmic difficulties are the result of inadequate sexual stimulation; in these cases, there may still be a need for care, but a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.', '', 'Associations between specific patterns of personality traits or psychopathology and orgasmic dysfunction have generally not been supported. Compared with women without the disorder, some women with female orgasmic disorder may have greater difficulty communicating about sexual issues. Overall sexual satisfaction, however, is not strongly correlated with orgasmic experience. Many women report high levels of sexual satisfaction despite rarely or never experiencing orgasm. Orgasmic difficulties in women often co-occur with problems related to sexual interest and arousal.', '', 'In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); (4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different women with this disorder.', 'Reported prevalence rates for female orgasmic problems in women vary widely, from 10% to 42%, depending on multiple factors (e.g., age, culture, duration, and severity of symptoms)(Graham 2010); however, these estimates do not take into account the presence of distress. Only a proportion of women experiencing orgasm difficulties also report associated distress(Oberg et al. 2004). Variation in how symptoms are assessed (e.g., the duration of symptoms and the recall period) also influence prevalence rates(Mercer et al. 2003). Approximately 10% of women do not experience orgasm throughout their lifetime(Laumann et al. 1994).', '', 'By definition, lifelong female orgasmic disorder indicates that the orgasmic difficulties have always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the woman’s orgasmic difficulties developed after a period of normal orgasmic functioning.', '', 'A woman’s first experience of orgasm can occur any time from the prepubertal period to well into adulthood. Women show a more variable pattern in age at first orgasm than do men, and women’s reports of having experienced orgasm increase with age(Kinsey et al. 1953). Many women learn to experience orgasm as they experience a wide variety of stimulation and acquire more knowledge about their bodies. Women’s rates of orgasm consistency (defined as “usually or always” experiencing orgasm) are higher during masturbation than during sexual activity with a partner(Laumann et al. 1994).', 'A wide range of psychological factors, such as anxiety and concerns about pregnancy, can potentially interfere with a woman’s ability to experience orgasm.There is a strong association between relationship problems, physical health, and mental health and orgasm difficulties in women(Bancroft et al. 2003; Laumann et al. 1994). Sociocultural factors (e.g., gender role expectations and religious norms) are also important influences on the experience of orgasmic difficulties.Many physiological factors may influence a woman’s experience of orgasm, including medical conditions and medications. Conditions such as multiple sclerosis, pelvic nerve damage from radical hysterectomy, and spinal cord injury can all influence orgasmic functioning in women. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are known to delay or inhibit orgasm in women. Women with vulvovaginal atrophy (characterized by symptoms such as vaginal dryness, itching, and pain) are significantly more likely to report orgasm difficulties than are women without this condition(Levine et al. 2008). Menopausal status is not consistently associated with the likelihood of orgasm difficulties(Avis et al. 2000). There may be a significant genetic contribution to variation in female orgasmic function(Burri et al. 2009). However, psychological, sociocultural, and physiological factors likely interact in complex ways to influence women’s experience of orgasm and of orgasm difficulties.The degree to which lack of orgasm in women is regarded as a problem that requires treatment may vary depending on cultural context. In addition, women differ in how important orgasm is to their sexual satisfaction. There may be marked sociocultural and generational differences in women’s orgasmic ability. For example, the prevalence of inability to reach orgasm has ranged from 17.7% (in Northern Europe) to 42.2% (in Southeast Asia)(Laumann et al.1995). Although measurable physiological changes occur during female orgasm, including changes in hormones, pelvic floor musculature, and brain activation, there is significant variability in these indicators of orgasm across women(Meston et al. 2004). In clinical situations, the diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder is based on a woman’s self-report.The functional consequences of female orgasmic disorder are unclear. Although there is a strong association between relationship problems and orgasmic difficulties in women, it is unclear whether relationship factors are risk factors for orgasmic difficulties or are consequences of those difficulties.', 'Nonsexual mental disorders', '', 'Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, which is characterized by markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities, may explain female orgasmic disorder. If the orgasmic difficulties are better explained by another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.', 'Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction', '', 'Substance/medication use may explain the orgasmic difficulties.', 'Another medical condition', '', 'If the disorder is due to another medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury), then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.', 'Interpersonal factors', '', 'If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship distress, intimate partner violence, or other significant stressors, are associated with the orgasmic difficulties, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.', 'Other sexual dysfunctions', '', 'Female orgasmic disorder may occur in association with other sexual dysfunctions (e.g., female sexual interest/arousal disorder). The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder. Occasional orgasmic difficulties that are short-term or infrequent and are not accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment are not diagnosed as female orgasmic disorder. A diagnosis is also not appropriate if the problems are the result of inadequate sexual stimulation.', 'Women with female orgasmic disorder may have co-occurring sexual interest/arousal difficulties. Women with diagnoses of other nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, may experience lower sexual interest/arousal, and this may indirectly increase the likelihood of orgasmic difficulties.', '', '']