['Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder', '', '', '    Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies and desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency is made by the clinician, taking into account factors that affect sexual functioning, such as age and general and sociocultural contexts of the individual’s life.', '', '    The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.', '', '    The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.', '', '    The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.', '', 'Specify whether:', '', '    Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became sexually active.', '', '    Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual function.', '', 'Specify whether:', '', '    Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', '', '    Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.', '', 'Specify current severity:', '', '    Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', '', '    Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', '', '    Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.', 'When an assessment for male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is being made, interpersonal context must be taken into account. A “desire discrepancy,” in which a man has lower desire for sexual activity than his partner, is not sufficient to diagnose male hypoactive sexual desire disorder. Both low/absent desire for sex and deficient/absent sexual thoughts or fantasies are required for a diagnosis of the disorder. There may be variation across men in how sexual desire is expressed(Janssen et al. 2008).', '', 'The lack of desire for sex and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or fantasies must be persistent or recurrent and must occur for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months. The inclusion of this duration criterion is meant to safeguard against making a diagnosis in cases in which a man’s low sexual desire may represent an adaptive response to adverse life conditions (e.g., concern about a partner’s pregnancy when the man is considering terminating the relationship). The introduction of “approximately” in Criterion B allows for clinician judgment in cases in which symptom duration does not meet the recommended 6-month threshold.', 'Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is sometimes associated with erectile and/or ejaculatory concerns. For example, persistent difficulties obtaining an erection may lead a man to lose interest in sexual activity. Men with hypoactive sexual desire disorder often report that they no longer initiate sexual activity and that they are minimally receptive to a partner’s attempt to initiate. Sexual activities (e.g., masturbation or partnered sexual activity) may sometimes occur even in the presence of low sexual desire. Relationship-specific preferences regarding patterns of sexual initiation must be taken into account when making a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder. Although men are more likely to initiate sexual activity(Baumeister et al. 2001), and thus low desire may be characterized by a pattern of non-initiation, many men may prefer to have their partner initiate sexual activity. In such situations, the man’s lack of receptivity to a partner’s initiation should be considered when evaluating low desire.', '', 'In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different men with this disorder.', 'The prevalence of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder varies depending on country of origin and method of assessment. Approximately 6% of younger men (ages 18–24 years) and 41% of older men (ages 66–74 years) have problems with sexual desire(Fugl-Meyer and Sjögren Fugl-Meyer 1999). However, a persistent lack of interest in sex, lasting 6 months or more, affects only a small proportion of men ages 16–44 (1.8%)(Mercer et al. 2003).', 'By definition, lifelong male hypoactive sexual desire disorder indicates that low or no sexual desire has always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the man’s low desire developed after a period of normal sexual desire. There is a requirement that low desire persist for approximately 6 months or more; thus, short-term changes in sexual desire should not be diagnosed as male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.', 'There is a normative age-related decline in sexual desire. Like women, men identify a variety of triggers for their sexual desire, and they describe a wide range of reasons that they choose to engage in sexual activity(Meston and Buss 2007). Although erotic visual cues may be more potent elicitors of desire in younger men, the potency of sexual cues may decrease with age and must be considered when evaluating men for hypoactive sexual desire disorder.', 'Mood and anxiety symptoms appear to be strong predictors of low desire in men(Corona et al. 2004). Up to half of men with a past history of psychiatric symptoms may have moderate or severe loss of desire, compared with only 15% of those without such a history. A man’s feelings about himself, his perception of his partner’s sexual desire toward him, feelings of being emotionally connected, and contextual variables may all negatively (as well as positively) affect sexual desire.', 'Alcohol use may increase the occurrence of low desire. Among gay men, self-directed homophobia, interpersonal problems, attitudes, lack of adequate sex education, and trauma resulting from early life experiences must be taken into account in explaining the low desire(Sandfort and de Keizer 2001). Social and cultural contextual factors should also be considered.Endocrine disorders such as hyperprolactinemia significantly affect sexual desire in men(Brotto 2010). Age is a significant risk factor for low desire in men. It is unclear whether or not men with low desire also have abnormally low levels of testosterone; however, among hypogonadal men, low desire is common. There also may be a critical threshold below which testosterone will affect sexual desire in men and above which there is little effect of testosterone on men’s desire(Bancroft 2012). ', 'There is marked variability in prevalence rates of low desire across cultures, ranging from 12.5% in Northern European men to 28% in Southeast Asian men ages 40–80 years(Laumann et al. 2005). Just as there are higher rates of low desire among East Asian subgroups of women, men of East Asian ancestry also have higher rates of low desire. Guilt about sex may mediate this association between East Asian ethnicity and sexual desire in men(Brotto et al. 2012).In contrast to the classification of sexual disorders in women, desire and arousal disorders have been retained as separate constructs in men. Despite some similarities in the experience of desire across men and women, and the fact that desire fluctuates over time and is dependent on contextual factors(Janssen et al. 2008), men do report a significantly higher intensity and frequency of sexual desire compared with women(Baumeister et al. 2001).', 'Nonsexual mental disorders', '', 'Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, which is characterized by “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities,” may explain the lack of sexual desire. If the lack of desire is better explained by another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.', 'Substance/medication use', '', 'Substance/medication use may explain the lack of sexual desire.', 'Another medical condition', '', 'If the low/absent desire and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or fantasies are better explained by the effects of another medical condition (e.g., hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.', 'Interpersonal factors', '', 'If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship distress or other significant stressors, are associated with the loss of desire in the man, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.', 'Other sexual dysfunctions', '', 'The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder; there is some evidence that up to one-half of men with low sexual desire also have erectile difficulties, and slightly fewer may also have early ejaculation difficulties(Fugl-Meyer and Fugl-Meyer 2002). If the man’s low desire is explained by self-identification as an asexual, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is not made(Brotto 2012).', 'Depression and other mental disorders, as well as endocrinological factors, are often comorbid with male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.', '', '']