['Kleptomania', 'Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value.', 'Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.', 'Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.', 'The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not in response to a delusion or a hallucination.', 'The stealing is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder.', 'The essential feature of kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal items even though the items are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value (Criterion A). The individual experiences a rising subjective sense of tension before the theft (Criterion B) and feels pleasure, gratification, or relief when committing the theft (Criterion C). The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done in response to a delusion or hallucination (Criterion D), and is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder (Criterion E). The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are typically of little value to the individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often gives them away or discards them. Occasionally the individual may hoard the stolen objects or surreptitiously return them. Although individuals with this disorder will generally avoid stealing when immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a police officer), they usually do not preplan the thefts or fully take into account the chances of apprehension. The stealing is done without assistance from, or collaboration with, others.Individuals with kleptomania typically attempt to resist the impulse to steal, and they are aware that the act is wrong and senseless. The individual frequently fears being apprehended and often feels depressed or guilty about the thefts. Neurotransmitter pathways associated with behavioral addictions, including those associated with the serotonin, dopamine, and opioid systems, appear to play a role in kleptomania as well(Grant et al. 2010).', 'Kleptomania occurs in about 4%–24% of individuals arrested for shoplifting(Talih 2011). Its prevalence in the general population is very rare, at approximately 0.3%–0.6%(Grant et al. 2010; Talih 2011). Females outnumber males at a ratio of 3:1(Talih 2011).', 'Age at onset of kleptomania is variable, but the disorder often begins in adolescence(Talih 2011). However, the disorder may begin in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and in rare cases in late adulthood. There is little systematic information on the course of kleptomania, but three typical courses have been described: sporadic with brief episodes and long periods of remission; episodic with protracted periods of stealing and periods of remission; and chronic with some degree of fluctuation. The disorder may continue for years, despite multiple convictions for shoplifting.There are no controlled family history studies of kleptomania. However, first-degree relatives of individuals with kleptomania may have higher rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder than the general population. There also appears to be a higher rate of substance use disorders, including alcohol use disorder, in relatives of individuals with kleptomania than in the general population(Grant et al. 2010). The disorder may cause legal, family, career, and personal difficulties.', 'Ordinary theft', '', 'Kleptomania should be distinguished from ordinary acts of theft or shoplifting. Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated by the usefulness of the object or its monetary worth. Some individuals, especially adolescents, may also steal on a dare, as an act of rebellion, or as a rite of passage. The diagnosis is not made unless other characteristic features of kleptomania are also present. Kleptomania is exceedingly rare, whereas shoplifting is relatively common.', 'Malingering', '', 'In malingering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of kleptomania to avoid criminal prosecution.', 'Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder', '', 'Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder are distinguished from kleptomania by a general pattern of antisocial behavior.', 'Manic episodes, psychotic episodes, and major neurocognitive disorder', '', 'Kleptomania should be distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during a manic episode, in response to delusions or hallucinations (as in, e.g., schizophrenia), or as a result of a major neurocognitive disorder.', 'Kleptomania may be associated with compulsive buying as well as with depressive and bipolar disorders (especially major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders, eating disorders (particularly bulimia nervosa), personality disorders, substance use disorders (especially alcohol use disorder), and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders (Grant et al. 2010; Talih 2011). ', '', '']