['Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurological Symptom Disorder)', 'One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function.', 'Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and recognized neurological or medical conditions.', 'The symptom or deficit is not better explained by another medical or mental disorder.', 'The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or warrants medical evaluation.', 'Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for conversion disorder is 300.11, which is assigned regardless of the symptom type. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the symptom type (see below).', 'Specify symptom type:', '(F44.4) With weakness or paralysis', '(F44.4) With abnormal movement (e.g., tremor, dystonic movement, myoclonus, gait disorder)', '(F44.4) With swallowing symptoms', '(F44.4) With speech symptom (e.g., dysphonia, slurred speech)', '(F44.5) With attacks or seizures', '(F44.6) With anesthesia or sensory loss', '(F44.6) With special sensory symptom (e.g., visual, olfactory, or hearing disturbance)', '(F44.7) With mixed symptoms', 'Specify if:', 'Acute episode: Symptoms present for less than 6 months.', 'Persistent: Symptoms occurring for 6 months or more.', 'Specify if:', 'With psychological stressor (specify stressor)', 'Without psychological stressor', 'Many clinicians use the alternative names of “functional” (referring to abnormal central nervous system functioning) or “psychogenic” (referring to an assumed etiology) to describe the symptoms of conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) (Stone et al. 2011). In conversion disorder, there may be one or more symptoms of various types. Motor symptoms include weakness or paralysis; abnormal movements, such as tremor or dystonic movements; gait abnormalities; and abnormal limb posturing. Sensory symptoms include altered, reduced, or absent skin sensation, vision, or hearing. Episodes of abnormal generalized limb shaking with apparent impaired or loss of consciousness may resemble epileptic seizures (also called psychogenic or non-epileptic seizures). There may be episodes of unresponsiveness resembling syncope or coma. Other symptoms include reduced or absent speech volume (dysphonia/aphonia), altered articulation (dysarthria), a sensation of a lump in the throat (globus), and diplopia.', 'Although the diagnosis requires that the symptom is not explained by neurological disease, it should not be made simply because results from investigations are normal or because the symptom is “bizarre.” There must be clinical findings that show clear evidence of incompatibility with neurological disease. Internal inconsistency at examination is one way to demonstrate incompatibility (i.e., demonstrating that physical signs elicited through one examination method are no longer positive when tested a different way). Examples of such examination findings include', 'Hoover’s sign, in which weakness of hip extension returns to normal strength with contralateral hip flexion against resistance(Stone et al. 2011).', 'Marked weakness of ankle plantar-flexion when tested on the bed in an individual who is able to walk on tiptoes;', 'Positive findings on the tremor entrainment test. On this test, a unilateral tremor may be identified as functional if the tremor changes when the individual is distracted away from it. This may be observed if the individual is asked to copy the examiner in making a rhythmical movement with their unaffected hand and this causes the functional tremor to change such that it copies or “entrains” to the rhythm of the unaffected hand or the functional tremor is suppressed, or no longer makes a simple rhythmical movement(Edwards and Bhatia 2012).', 'In attacks resembling epilepsy or syncope (“psychogenic” non-epileptic attacks), the occurrence of closed eyes with resistance to opening(Avbersek and Sisodiya 2010) or a normal simultaneous electroencephalogram (although this alone does not exclude all forms of epilepsy or syncope).', 'For visual symptoms, a tubular visual field (i.e., tunnel vision)(Chen et al. 2007).', 'It is important to note that the diagnosis of conversion disorder should be based on the overall clinical picture and not on a single clinical finding.', 'A number of associated features can support the diagnosis of conversion disorder. There may be a history of multiple similar somatic symptoms. Onset may be associated with stress or trauma, either psychological or physical in nature. The potential etiological relevance of this stress or trauma may be suggested by a close temporal relationship. However, while assessment for stress and trauma is important, the diagnosis should not be withheld if none is found(Stone et al. 2011).', 'Conversion disorder is often associated with dissociative symptoms, such as depersonalization, derealization, and dissociative amnesia, particularly at symptom onset or during attacks.', 'The diagnosis of conversion disorder does not require the judgment that the symptoms are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned), as the definite absence of feigning may not be reliably discerned. The phenomenon of la belle indifférence (i.e., lack of concern about the nature or implications of the symptom) has been associated with conversion disorder but it is not specific for conversion disorder and should not be used to make the diagnosis. Similarly the concept of secondary gain (i.e., when individuals derive external benefits such as money or release from responsibilities) is also not specific to conversion disorder and particularly in the context of definite evidence for feigning, the diagnoses that should be considered instead would include factitious disorder or malingering (see the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).', 'Transient conversion symptoms are common, but the precise prevalence of the disorder is unknown. This is partly because the diagnosis usually requires assessment in secondary care, where it is found in approximately 5% of referrals to neurology clinics. The incidence of individual persistent conversion symptoms is estimated to be 2–5/100,000 per year(Reuber 2008; Stone et al. 2010).Onset has been reported throughout the life course. The onset of non-epileptic attacks peaks in the third decade, and motor symptoms have their peak onset in the fourth decade. The symptoms can be transient or persistent. The prognosis may be better in younger children than in adolescents and adults(Pehlivantürk and Unal 2002).', 'Temperamental', 'Maladaptive personality traits are commonly associated with conversion disorder.', 'Environmental', 'There may be a history of childhood abuse and neglect. Stressful life events are often, but not always, present(Reuber 2008).', 'Genetic and physiological', 'The presence of neurological disease that causes similar symptoms is a risk factor (e.g., non-epileptic seizures are more common in patients who also have epilepsy)(Crimlisk et al. 1998).', 'Course modifiers', 'Short duration of symptoms and acceptance of the diagnosis are positive prognostic factors. Maladaptive personality traits, the presence of comorbid physical disease, and the receipt of disability benefits may be negative prognostic factors(Crimlisk et al. 1998; Reuber 2008).', 'Changes resembling conversion (and dissociative) symptoms are common in certain culturally sanctioned rituals(Brown and Lewis-Fernández 2011). If the symptoms are fully explained within the particular cultural context and do not result in clinically significant distress or disability, then the diagnosis of conversion disorder is not made.Conversion disorder is two to three times more common in females. Individuals with conversion symptoms may have substantial disability. The severity of disability can be similar to that experienced by individuals with comparable medical diseases. If another mental disorder better explains the symptoms, that diagnosis should be made. However the diagnosis of conversion disorder may be made in the presence of another mental disorder.', 'Neurological disease', 'The main differential diagnosis is neurological disease that might better explain the symptoms. After a thorough neurological assessment, an unexpected neurological disease cause for the symptoms is rarely found at follow up(Stone et al. 2005). However, reassessment may be required if the symptoms appear to be progressive. Conversion disorder may coexist with neurological disease.', 'Somatic symptom disorder', 'Conversion disorder may be diagnosed in addition to somatic symptom disorder. Most of the somatic symptoms encountered in somatic symptom disorder cannot be demonstrated to be clearly incompatible with pathophysiology (e.g., pain, fatigue), whereas in conversion disorder, such incompatibility is required for the diagnosis. The excessive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors characterizing somatic symptom disorder are often absent in conversion disorder.', 'Factitious disorder and malingering', 'The diagnosis of conversion disorder does not require the judgment that the symptoms are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned), because assessment of conscious intention is unreliable. However definite evidence of feigning (e.g., clear evidence that loss of function is present during the examination but not at home) would suggest a diagnosis of factitious disorder if the individual’s apparent aim is to assume the sick role or malingering if the aim is to obtain an incentive such as money.', 'Dissociative disorders', 'Dissociative symptoms are common in individuals with conversion disorder. If both conversion disorder and a dissociative disorder are present, both diagnoses should be made.', 'Body dysmorphic disorder', 'Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are excessively concerned about a perceived defect in their physical features but do not complain of symptoms of sensory or motor functioning in the affected body part.', 'Depressive disorders', 'In depressive disorders, individuals may report general heaviness of their limbs, whereas the weakness of conversion disorder is more focal and prominent. Depressive disorders are also differentiated by the presence of core depressive symptoms.', 'Panic disorder', 'Episodic neurological symptoms (e.g., tremors and paresthesias) can occur in both conversion disorder and panic attacks. In panic attacks, the neurological symptoms are typically transient and acutely episodic with characteristic cardiorespiratory symptoms. Loss of awareness with amnesia for the attack and violent limb movements occur in non-epileptic attacks, but not in panic attacks.', 'Anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, and depressive disorders commonly co-occur with conversion disorder (Reuber 2008; Stone et al. 2010). Somatic symptom disorder may co-occur as well. Psychosis, substance use disorder, and alcohol misuse are uncommon. Personality disorders are more common in individuals with conversion disorder than in the general population. Neurological or other medical conditions commonly coexist with conversion disorder as well.', '', '']