['Factitious Disorder', 'Factitious Disorder Imposed on Self', 'Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, associated with identified deception.', 'The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired, or injured.', 'The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.', 'The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.', 'Specify:', 'Single episode', 'Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or induction of injury)', 'Factitious Disorder Imposed on Another (Previously Factitious Disorder by Proxy)', 'Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or induction of injury or disease, in another, associated with identified deception.', 'The individual presents another individual (victim) to others as ill, impaired, or injured.', 'The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards.', 'The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.', 'Note: The perpetrator, not the victim, receives this diagnosis.', 'Specify:', 'Single episode', 'Recurrent episodes (two or more events of falsification of illness and/or induction of injury)', 'When an individual falsifies illness in another (e.g., children, adults, pets), the diagnosis is factitious disorder imposed on another. The perpetrator, not the victim, is given the diagnosis. The victim may be given an abuse diagnosis (e.g., 995.54 [T74.12X]; see the chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). ', 'When an individual falsifies illness in another (e.g., children, adults, pets), the diagnosis is factitious disorder imposed on another. The perpetrator, not the victim, is given the diagnosis. The victim may be given an abuse diagnosis (e.g., 995.54 [T74.12X]; see the chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). ', 'Individuals with factitious disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another are at risk for experiencing great psychological distress or functional impairment by causing harm to themselves and others. Family, friends, and health care professionals are also often adversely affected by their behavior. Factitious disorders have similarities to substance use disorders, eating disorders, impulse-control disorders, pedophilic disorder, and some other established disorders related to both the persistence of the behavior and the intentional efforts to conceal the disordered behavior through deception. Whereas some aspects of factitious disorders might represent criminal behavior (e.g., factitious disorder imposed on another, in which the parent’s actions represent abuse and maltreatment of a child), such criminal behavior and mental illness are not mutually exclusive. The diagnosis of factitious disorder emphasizes the objective identification of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness, rather than an inference about intent or possible underlying motivation. Moreover, such behaviors, including the induction of injury or disease, are associated with deception', 'The prevalence of factitious disorder is unknown, likely because of the role of deception in this population. Among patients in hospital settings, it is estimated that about 1% of individuals have presentations that meet the criteria for factitious disorder (Reich and Gottfried 1983; Sansone et al. 1997).', 'The course of factitious disorder is usually one of intermittent episodes. Single episodes and episodes that are characterized as persistent and unremitting are both less common. Onset is usually in early adulthood, often after hospitalization for a medical condition or a mental disorder. When imposed on another, the disorder may begin after hospitalization of the individual’s child or other dependent. In individuals with recurrent episodes of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness and/or induction of injury, this pattern of successive deceptive contact with medical personnel, including hospitalizations, may become lifelong.', 'Caregivers who lie about abuse injuries in dependents solely to protect themselves from liability are not diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another because protection from liability is an external reward (Criterion C, the deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards). Such caregivers who, upon observation, analysis of medical records, and/or interviews with others, are found to lie more extensively than needed for immediate self-protection are diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another.', 'Somatic symptom disorder', 'In somatic symptom disorder, there may be excessive attention and treatment seeking for perceived medical concerns, but there is no evidence that the individual is providing false information or behaving deceptively(Feldman et al. 2001; Krahn et al. 2008).', 'Malingering', 'Malingering is differentiated from factitious disorder by the intentional reporting of symptoms for personal gain (e.g., money, time off work). In contrast, the diagnosis of factitious disorder requires the absence of obvious rewards(Ford 2011). ', 'Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)', 'Conversion disorder is characterized by neurological symptoms that are inconsistent with neurological pathophysiology. Factitious disorder with neurological symptoms is distinguished from conversion disorder by evidence of deceptive falsification of symptoms.', 'Borderline personality disorder', 'Deliberate physical self-harm in the absence of suicidal intent can also occur in association with other mental disorders such as borderline personality disorder. Factitious disorder requires that the induction of injury occur in association with deception.', 'Medical condition or mental disorder not associated with intentional symptom falsification', 'Presentation of signs and symptoms of illness that do not conform to an identifiable medical condition or mental disorder increases the likelihood of the presence of a factitious disorder. However, the diagnosis of factitious disorder does not exclude the presence of true medical condition or mental disorder, as comorbid illness often occurs in the individual along with factitious disorder. For example, individuals who might manipulate blood sugar levels to produce symptoms may also have diabetes.', '', '']