['Pica', 'Persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances over a period of at least 1 month.', 'The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is inappropriate to the developmental level of the individual.', 'The eating behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially normative practice.', 'If the eating behavior occurs in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmental disorder], autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) or medical condition (including pregnancy), it is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention.', 'Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for pica is 307.52 and is used for children or adults. The ICD-10-CM codes for pica are F98.3 in children and ( F50.89 ) in adults.', 'Specify if:', 'In remission: After full criteria for pica were previously met, the criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.', 'The essential feature of pica is the eating of one or more nonnutritive, nonfood substances on a persistent basis over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A) that is severe enough to warrant clinical attention. Typical substances ingested tend to vary with age and availability and might include paper, soap, cloth, hair, string, wool, soil, chalk, talcum powder, paint, gum, metal, pebbles, charcoal or coal, ash, clay, starch, or ice. The term nonfood is included because the diagnosis of pica does not apply to ingestion of diet products that have minimal nutritional content. There is typically no aversion to food in general. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B) and not part of a culturally supported or socially normative practice (Criterion C). A minimum age of 2 years is suggested for a pica diagnosis to exclude developmentally normal mouthing of objects by infants that results in ingestion. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances can be an associated feature of other mental disorders (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmental disorder], autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia). If the eating behavior occurs exclusively in the context of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D).Although deficiencies in vitamins or minerals (e.g., zinc, iron) have been reported in some instances(Barton et al. 2010), often no specific biological abnormalities are found. In some cases, pica comes to clinical attention only following general medical complications (e.g., mechanical bowel problems; intestinal obstruction, such as that resulting from a bezoar; intestinal perforation; infections such as toxoplasmosis and toxocariasis as a result of ingesting feces or dirt; poisoning, such as by ingestion of lead-based paint).The prevalence of pica is unclear. Among individuals with intellectual disability, the prevalence of pica appears to increase with the severity of the conditionOnset of pica can occur in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, although childhood onset is most commonly reported. Pica can occur in otherwise normally developing children, whereas in adults, it appears more likely to occur in the context of intellectual disability or other mental disorders. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may also manifest in pregnancy, when specific cravings (e.g., chalk or ice) might occur. The diagnosis of pica during pregnancy is only appropriate if such cravings lead to the ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood substances to the extent that the eating of these substances poses potential medical risks. The course of the disorder can be protracted and can result in medical emergencies (e.g., intestinal obstruction, acute weight loss, poisoning). The disorder can potentially be fatal depending on substances ingested.', 'Environmental', 'Neglect, lack of supervision, and developmental delay can increase the risk for this condition(Bryant-Waugh et al. 2010).', 'In some populations, the eating of earth or other seemingly nonnutritive substances is believed to be of spiritual, medicinal, or other social value, or may be a culturally supported or socially normative practice. Such behavior does not warrant a diagnosis of pica (Criterion C).Pica occurs in both males and females. It can occur in females during pregnancy; however, little is known about the course of pica in the postpartum period. Abdominal flat plate radiography, ultrasound, and other scanning methods may reveal obstructions related to pica. Blood tests and other laboratory tests can be used to ascertain levels of poisoning or the nature of infection. Pica can significantly impair physical functioning, but it is rarely the sole cause of impairment in social functioning. Pica often occurs with other disorders associated with impaired social functioning.Eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may occur during the course of other mental disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) and in Kleine-Levin syndrome. In any such instance, an additional diagnosis of pica should be given only if the eating behavior is sufficiently persistent and severe to warrant additional clinical attention.', 'Anorexia nervosa', 'Pica can usually be distinguished from the other feeding and eating disorders by the consumption of nonnutritive, nonfood substances. It is important to note, however, that some presentations of anorexia nervosa include ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood substances, such as paper tissues, as a means of attempting to control appetite. In such cases, when the eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is primarily used as a means of weight control, anorexia nervosa should be the primary diagnosis.', 'Factitious disorder', 'Some individuals with factitious disorder may intentionally ingest foreign objects as part of the pattern of falsification of physical symptoms. In such instances, there is an element of deception that is consistent with deliberate induction of injury or disease.', 'Nonsuicidal self-injury and nonsuicidal self-injury behaviors in personality disorders', 'Some individuals may swallow potentially harmful items (e.g., pins, needles, knives) in the context of maladaptive behavior patterns associated with personality disorders or nonsuicidal self-injury.', 'Disorders most commonly comorbid with pica are autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) (Clark et al. 2010; Martindale et al. 2010), and, to a lesser degree, schizophrenia and obsessive-compulsive disorder(Dumaguing et al. 2003). Pica can be associated with trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. In comorbid presentations, the hair or skin is typically ingested(Frey et al. 2005). Pica can also be associated with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, particularly in individuals with a strong sensory component to their presentation. When an individual is known to have pica, assessment should include consideration of the possibility of gastrointestinal complications, poisoning, infection, and nutritional deficiency. ', '', '']