['Anorexia Nervosa', 'Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a significantly low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health. Significantly low weight is defined as a weight that is less than minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.', 'Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly low weight.', 'Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of the current low body weight.', 'Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for anorexia nervosa is 307.1, which is assigned regardless of the subtype. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the subtype (see below).', 'Specify whether:', '(F50.01) Restricting type: During the last 3 months, the individual has not engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). This subtype describes presentations in which weight loss is accomplished primarily through dieting, fasting, and/or excessive exercise.', '(F50.02) Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).', 'Specify if:', 'In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met, Criterion A (low body weight) has not been met for a sustained period, but either Criterion B (intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat or behavior that interferes with weight gain) or Criterion C (disturbances in self-perception of weight and shape) is still met.', 'In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met, none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.', 'Specify current severity:', 'The minimum level of severity is based, for adults, on current body mass index (BMI) (see below) or, for children and adolescents, on BMI percentile. The ranges below are derived from World Health Organization categories for thinness in adults; for children and adolescents, corresponding BMI percentiles should be used. The level of severity may be increased to reflect clinical symptoms, the degree of functional disability, and the need for supervision.', 'Mild: BMI = 17 kg/m2', 'Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2', 'Severe: BMI 15–15.99 kg/m2', 'Extreme: BMI < 15 kg/m2', 'Most individuals with the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa who binge eat also purge through self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. Some individuals with this subtype of anorexia nervosa do not binge eat but do regularly purge after the consumption of small amounts of food.', 'Crossover between the subtypes over the course of the disorder is not uncommon; therefore, subtype description should be used to describe current symptoms rather than longitudinal course.', 'There are three essential features of anorexia nervosa: persistent energy intake restriction; intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain; and a disturbance in self-perceived weight or shape. The individual maintains a body weight that is below a minimally normal level for age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health (Criterion A). Individuals’ body weights frequently meet this criterion following a significant weight loss, but among children and adolescents, there may alternatively be failure to make expected weight gain or to maintain a normal developmental trajectory (i.e., while growing in height) instead of weight loss(Rosen and American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Adolescence 2010).', 'Criterion A requires that the individual’s weight be significantly low (i.e., less than minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected). Weight assessment can be challenging because normal weight range differs among individuals, and different thresholds have been published defining thinness or underweight status(Thomas et al. 2009). Body mass index (BMI; calculated as weight in kilograms/height in meters2) is a useful measure to assess body weight for height. For adults, a BMI of 18.5 kg/m2 has been employed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2011) and the World Health Organization (WHO)(World Health Organization 1995) as the lower limit of normal body weight. Therefore, most adults with a BMI greater than or equal to 18.5 kg/m2 would not be considered to have a significantly low body weight. On the other hand, a BMI of lower than 17.0 kg/m2 has been considered by the WHO to indicate moderate or severe thinness(World Health Organization 1995); therefore, an individual with a BMI less than 17.0 kg/m2 would likely be considered to have a significantly low weight. An adult with a BMI between 17.0 and 18.5 kg/m2, or even above 18.5 kg/m2, might be considered to have a significantly low weight if clinical history or other physiological information supports this judgment.', 'For children and adolescents, determining a BMI-for-age percentile is useful (see, e.g., the CDC BMI percentile calculator for children and teenagers ) (http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/dnpabmi/). As for adults, it is not possible to provide definitive standards for judging whether a child’s or an adolescent’s weight is significantly low, and variations in developmental trajectories among youth limit the utility of simple numerical guidelines. The CDC has used a BMI-for-age below the 5th percentile as suggesting underweight; however, children and adolescents with a BMI above this benchmark may be judged to be significantly underweight in light of failure to maintain their expected growth trajectory. In summary, in determining whether Criterion A is met, the clinician should consider available numerical guidelines, as well as the individual’s body build, weight history, and any physiological disturbances.', 'Individuals with this disorder typically display an intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat (Criterion B)(Yager and Andersen 2005). This intense fear of becoming fat is usually not alleviated by weight loss. In fact, concern about weight gain may increase even as weight falls. Younger individuals with anorexia nervosa, as well as some adults, may not recognize or acknowledge a fear of weight gain(Becker et al. 2009). In the absence of another explanation for the significantly low weight, clinician inference drawn from collateral history, observational data, physical and laboratory findings, or longitudinal course either indicating a fear of weight gain or supporting persistent behaviors that prevent it may be used to establish Criterion B.', 'The experience and significance of body weight and shape are distorted in these individuals (Criterion C)(Attia and Walsh 2007; Yager and Andersen 2005). Some individuals feel globally overweight. Others realize that they are thin but are still concerned that certain body parts, particularly the abdomen, buttocks, and thighs, are “too fat.” They may employ a variety of techniques to evaluate their body size or weight, including frequent weighing, obsessive measuring of body parts, and persistent use of a mirror to check for perceived areas of “fat.” The self-esteem of individuals with anorexia nervosa is highly dependent on their perceptions of body shape and weight. Weight loss is often viewed as an impressive achievement and a sign of extraordinary self-discipline, whereas weight gain is perceived as an unacceptable failure of self-control. Although some individuals with this disorder may acknowledge being thin, they often do not recognize the serious medical implications of their malnourished state.', 'Often, the individual is brought to professional attention by family members after marked weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. If individuals seek help on their own, it is usually because of distress over the somatic and psychological sequelae of starvation. It is rare for an individual with anorexia nervosa to complain of weight loss per se. In fact, individuals with anorexia nervosa frequently either lack insight into or deny the problem. It is therefore often important to obtain information from family members or other sources to evaluate the history of weight loss and other features of the illness.', 'The semi-starvation of anorexia nervosa, and the purging behaviors sometimes associated with it, can result in significant and potentially life-threatening medical conditions. The nutritional compromise associated with this disorder affects most major organ systems and can produce a variety of disturbances. Physiological disturbances, including amenorrhea and vital sign abnormalities, are common. While most of the physiological disturbances associated with malnutrition are reversible with nutritional rehabilitation, some, including loss of bone mineral density, are often not completely reversible. Behaviors such as self-induced vomiting and misuse of laxatives, diuretics, and enemas may cause a number of disturbances that lead to abnormal laboratory findings; however, some individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit no laboratory abnormalities(Mitchell and Crow 2006).', 'When seriously underweight, many individuals with anorexia nervosa have depressive signs and symptoms such as depressed mood, social withdrawal, irritability, insomnia, and diminished interest in sex(Attia and Walsh 2007; Yager and Andersen 2005). Because these features are also observed in individuals without anorexia nervosa who are significantly undernourished, many of the depressive features may be secondary to the physiological sequelae of semi-starvation(Keys et al. 1950), although they may also be sufficiently severe to warrant an additional diagnosis of major depressive disorder.', 'Obsessive-compulsive features, both related and unrelated to food, are often prominent. Most individuals with anorexia nervosa are preoccupied with thoughts of food. Some collect recipes or hoard food. Observations of behaviors associated with other forms of starvation suggest that obsessions and compulsions related to food may be exacerbated by undernutrition. When individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit obsessions and compulsions that are not related to food, body shape, or weight, an additional diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may be warranted.', 'Other features sometimes associated with anorexia nervosa include concerns about eating in public, feelings of ineffectiveness, a strong desire to control one’s environment, inflexible thinking, limited social spontaneity, and overly restrained emotional expression. Compared with individuals with anorexia nervosa, restricting type, those with binge-eating/purging type have higher rates of impulsivity and are more likely to abuse alcohol and other drugs(Yager and Andersen 2005).', 'A subgroup of individuals with anorexia nervosa show excessive levels of physical activity(Klein et al. 2007). Increases in physical activity often precede onset of the disorder, and over the course of the disorder increased activity accelerates weight loss. During treatment, excessive activity may be difficult to control, thereby jeopardizing weight recovery.', 'Individuals with anorexia nervosa may misuse medications, such as by manipulating dosage, in order to achieve weight loss or avoid weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus may omit or reduce insulin doses in order to minimize carbohydrate metabolism.', 'The 12-month prevalence of anorexia nervosa among young females is approximately 0.4%(Hoek 2006). Less is known about prevalence among males, but anorexia nervosa is far less common in males than in females, with clinical populations generally reflecting approximately a 10:1 female-to-male ratio(Götestam et al. 1998; Hoek et al. 1995; Lucas et al. 1991).', 'Anorexia nervosa commonly begins during adolescence or young adulthood(Attia and Walsh 2007). It rarely begins before puberty or after age 40, but cases of both early and late onset have been described. The onset of this disorder is often associated with a stressful life event, such as leaving home for college. The course and outcome of anorexia nervosa are highly variable. Younger individuals may manifest atypical features, including denying “fear of fat.” Older individuals more likely have a longer duration of illness, and their clinical presentation may include more signs and symptoms of long-standing disorder. Clinicians should not exclude anorexia nervosa from the differential diagnosis solely on the basis of older age.', 'Many individuals have a period of changed eating behavior prior to full criteria for the disorder being met. Some individuals with anorexia nervosa recover fully after a single episode, with some exhibiting a fluctuating pattern of weight gain followed by relapse, and others experiencing a chronic course over many years. Hospitalization may be required to restore weight and to address medical complications. Most individuals with anorexia nervosa experience remission within 5 years of presentation. Among individuals admitted to hospitals, overall remission rates may be lower. The crude mortality rate (CMR) for anorexia nervosa is approximately 5% per decade(Arcelus et al. 2011; Smink et al. 2012). Death most commonly results from medical complications associated with the disorder itself or from suicide(Arcelus et al. 2011; Hoek 2006).', 'Temperamental', 'Individuals who develop anxiety disorders or display obsessional traits in childhood are at increased risk of developing anorexia nervosa (Walsh and Attia 2011).', 'Environmental', 'Historical and cross-cultural variability in the prevalence of anorexia nervosa supports its association with cultures and settings in which thinness is valued. Occupations and avocations that encourage thinness, such as modeling and elite athletics, are also associated with increased risk.', 'Genetic and physiological', 'There is an increased risk of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with the disorder. An increased risk of bipolar and depressive disorders has also been found among first-degree relatives of individuals with anorexia nervosa, particularly relatives of individuals with the binge-eating/purging type. Concordance rates for anorexia nervosa in monozygotic twins are significantly higher than those for dizygotic twins(Pinheiro et al. 2009). A range of brain abnormalities has been described in anorexia nervosa using functional imaging technologies (functional magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography). The degree to which these findings reflect changes associated with malnutrition versus primary abnormalities associated with the disorder is unclear(Van den Eynde and Treasure 2009)', 'Anorexia nervosa occurs across culturally and socially diverse populations, although available evidence suggests cross-cultural variation in its occurrence and presentation(Hoek et al. 2005; Keel and Klump 2003). Anorexia nervosa is probably most prevalent in post-industrialized, high-income countries such as in the United States, many European countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, but its incidence in most low- and middle-income countries is uncertain. Whereas the prevalence of anorexia nervosa appears comparatively low among Latinos, African Americans, and Asians in the United States, clinicians should be aware that mental health service utilization among individuals with an eating disorder is significantly lower in these ethnic groups and that the low rates may reflect an ascertainment bias(Marques et al. 2011). The presentation of weight concerns among individuals with feeding and eating disorders varies substantially across cultural contexts. The absence of an expressed intense fear of weight gain, sometimes referred to as “fat phobia,” appears to be relatively more common in populations in Asia, where the rationale for dietary restriction is commonly related to a more culturally sanctioned complaint such as gastrointestinal discomfort(Becker et al. 2009). Within the United States, presentations without a stated intense fear of weight gain may be comparatively more common among Latino groups.', 'The following laboratory abnormalities may be observed in anorexia nervosa; their presence may serve to increase diagnostic confidence.', 'Hematology', 'Leukopenia is common, with the loss of all cell types but usually with apparent lymphocytosis. Mild anemia can occur, as well as thrombocytopenia and, rarely, bleeding problems.', 'Serum chemistry', 'Dehydration may be reflected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen level. Hypercholesterolemia is common. Hepatic enzyme levels may be elevated. Hypomagnesemia, hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occasionally observed. Self-induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), hypochloremia, and hypokalemia; laxative abuse may cause a mild metabolic acidosis.', 'Endocrine', 'Serum thyroxine (T4) levels are usually in the low-normal range; triiodothyronine (T3) levels are decreased, while reverse T3 levels are elevated. Females have low serum estrogen levels(Warren 2011), whereas males have low levels of serum testosterone.', 'Electrocardiography', 'Sinus bradycardia is common, and, rarely, arrhythmias are noted. Significant prolongation of the QTc interval is observed in some individuals(Mitchell and Crow 2006).', 'Bone mass', 'Low bone mineral density, with specific areas of osteopenia or osteoporosis, is often seen. The risk of fracture is significantly elevated(Mehler et al. 2011).', 'Electroencephalography', 'Diffuse abnormalities, reflecting a metabolic encephalopathy, may result from significant fluid and electrolyte disturbances.', 'Resting energy expenditure', 'There is often a significant reduction in resting energy expenditure.', 'Physical signs and symptoms', 'Many of the physical signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa are attributable to starvation. Amenorrhea is commonly present and appears to be an indicator of physiological dysfunction. If present, amenorrhea is usually a consequence of the weight loss, but in a minority of individuals it may actually precede the weight loss. In prepubertal females, menarche may be delayed(Attia and Roberto 2009; Golden and Carlson 2008; Muñoz and Argente 2002). In addition to amenorrhea, there may be complaints of constipation, abdominal pain, cold intolerance, lethargy, and excess energy.', 'The most remarkable finding on physical examination is emaciation. Commonly, there is also significant hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia. Some individuals develop lanugo, a fine downy body hair. Some develop peripheral edema, especially during weight restoration or upon cessation of laxative and diuretic abuse. Rarely, petechiae or ecchymoses, usually on the extremities, may indicate a bleeding diathesis. Some individuals evidence a yellowing of the skin associated with hypercarotenemia. As may be seen in individuals with bulimia nervosa, individuals with anorexia nervosa who self-induce vomiting may have hypertrophy of the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, as well as dental enamel erosion. Some individuals may have scars or calluses on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact with the teeth while inducing vomiting(Mitchell and Crow 2006).Suicide risk is elevated in anorexia nervosa, with rates reported as 12 per 100,000 per year(Preti et al. 2011). Comprehensive evaluation of individuals with anorexia nervosa should include assessment of suicide-related ideation and behaviors as well as other risk factors for suicide, including a history of suicide attempt(s). Individuals with anorexia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with the disorder. While some individuals remain active in social and professional functioning, others demonstrate significant social isolation and/or failure to fulfill academic or career potential.Other possible causes of either significantly low body weight or significant weight loss should be considered in the differential diagnosis of anorexia nervosa, especially when the presenting features are atypical (e.g., onset after age 40 years)(Attia and Walsh 2007).', 'Medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, hyperthyroidism, occult malignancies, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS])', 'Serious weight loss may occur in medical conditions, but individuals with these disorders usually do not also manifest a disturbance in the way their body weight or shape is experienced or an intense fear of weight gain or persist in behaviors that interfere with appropriate weight gain. Acute weight loss associated with a medical condition can occasionally be followed by the onset or recurrence of anorexia nervosa, which can initially be masked by the comorbid medical condition. Rarely, anorexia nervosa develops after bariatric surgery for obesity.', 'Major depressive disorder', 'In major depressive disorder, severe weight loss may occur, but most individuals with major depressive disorder do not have either a desire for excessive weight loss or an intense fear of gaining weight.', 'Schizophrenia', 'Individuals with schizophrenia may exhibit odd eating behavior and occasionally experience significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining weight and the body image disturbance required for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.', 'Substance use disorders', 'Individuals with substance use disorders may experience low weight due to poor nutritional intake but generally do not fear gaining weight and do not manifest body image disturbance. Individuals who abuse substances that reduce appetite (e.g., cocaine, stimulants) and who also endorse fear of weight gain should be carefully evaluated for the possibility of comorbid anorexia nervosa, given that the substance use may represent a persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain (Criterion B).', 'Social anxiety disorder (social phobia), obsessive-compulsive disorder, and body dysmorphic disorder', 'Some of the features of anorexia nervosa overlap with the criteria for social phobia, OCD, and body dysmorphic disorder. Specifically, individuals may feel humiliated or embarrassed to be seen eating in public, as in social phobia; may exhibit obsessions and compulsions related to food, as in OCD; or may be preoccupied with an imagined defect in bodily appearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder. If the individual with anorexia nervosa has social fears that are limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of social phobia should not be made, but social fears unrelated to eating behavior (e.g., excessive fear of speaking in public) may warrant an additional diagnosis of social phobia. Similarly, an additional diagnosis of OCD should be considered only if the individual exhibits obsessions and compulsions unrelated to food (e.g., an excessive fear of contamination), and an additional diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder should be considered only if the distortion is unrelated to body shape and size (e.g., preoccupation that one’s nose is too big).', 'Bulimia nervosa', 'Individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit recurrent episodes of binge eating, engage in inappropriate behavior to avoid weight gain (e.g., self-induced vomiting), and are overly concerned with body shape and weight. However, unlike individuals with anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, individuals with bulimia nervosa maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal level.', 'Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder', 'Individuals with this disorder may exhibit significant weight loss or significant nutritional deficiency, but they do not have a fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, nor do they have a disturbance in the way they experience their body shape and weight.', 'Bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders commonly co-occur with anorexia nervosa (). Many individuals with anorexia nervosa report the presence of either an anxiety disorder or symptoms prior to onset of their eating disorder. OCD is described in some individuals with anorexia nervosa, especially those with the restricting type. Alcohol use disorder and other substance use disorders may also be comorbid with anorexia nervosa, especially among those with the binge-eating/purging type.', '', '']