['Bulimia Nervosa', 'Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by both of the following:', 'Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of food that is definitely larger than what most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances.', 'A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).', 'Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors in order to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.', 'The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.', 'Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.', 'The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.', 'Specify if:', 'In partial remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met, some, but not all, of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.', 'In full remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met, none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.', 'Specify current severity:', 'The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of inappropriate compensatory behaviors (see below). The level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms and the degree of functional disability.', 'Mild: An average of 1–3 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per week.', 'Moderate: An average of 4–7 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per week.', 'Severe: An average of 8–13 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per week.', 'Extreme: An average of 14 or more episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per week.', 'There are three essential features of bulimia nervosa: recurrent episodes of binge eating (Criterion A), recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion B), and self-evaluation that is unduly influenced by body shape and weight (Criterion D). To qualify for the diagnosis, the binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors must occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion C).', 'An “episode of binge eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is definitely larger than most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a celebration or holiday meal. A “discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout the day would not be considered an eating binge.', 'An occurrence of excessive food consumption must be accompanied by a sense of lack of control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss of control is the inability to refrain from eating or to stop eating once started. Some individuals describe a dissociative quality during, or following, the binge-eating episodes. The impairment in control associated with binge eating may not be absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters the room. Some individuals report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized by an acute feeling of loss of control but rather by a more generalized pattern of uncontrolled eating. If individuals report that they have abandoned efforts to control their eating, loss of control should be considered as present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.', 'The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient. However, during binges, individuals tend to eat foods they would otherwise avoid.', 'Individuals with bulimia nervosa are typically ashamed of their eating problems and attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspicuously as possible. The binge eating often continues until the individual is uncomfortably, or even painfully, full. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect. Other triggers include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related to body weight, body shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mitigate factors that precipitated the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation and dysphoria often are the delayed consequences.', 'Another essential feature of bulimia nervosa is the recurrent use of inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain, collectively referred to as purge behaviors or purging (Criterion B). Many individuals with bulimia nervosa employ several methods to compensate for binge eating. Vomiting is the most common inappropriate compensatory behavior. The immediate effects of vomiting include relief from physical discomfort and reduction of fear of gaining weight. In some cases, vomiting becomes a goal in itself, and the individual will binge eat in order to vomit or will vomit after eating a small amount of food. Individuals with bulimia nervosa may use a variety of methods to induce vomiting, including the use of fingers or instruments to stimulate the gag reflex. Individuals generally become adept at inducing vomiting and are eventually able to vomit at will. Rarely, individuals consume syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Other purging behaviors include the misuse of laxatives and diuretics(Mitchell and Crow 2006). A number of other compensatory methods may also be used in rare cases. Individuals with bulimia nervosa may misuse enemas following episodes of binge eating, but this is seldom the sole compensatory method employed. Individuals with this disorder may take thyroid hormone in an attempt to avoid weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus and bulimia nervosa may omit or reduce insulin doses in order to reduce the metabolism of food consumed during eating binges. Individuals with bulimia nervosa may fast for a day or more or exercise excessively in an attempt to prevent weight gain. Exercise may be considered excessive when it significantly interferes with important activities, when it occurs at inappropriate times or in inappropriate settings, or when the individual continues to exercise despite injury or other medical complications.', 'Individuals with bulimia nervosa place an excessive emphasis on body shape or weight in their self-evaluation, and these factors are typically extremely important in determining self-esteem (Criterion D). Individuals with this disorder may closely resemble those with anorexia nervosa in their fear of gaining weight, in their desire to lose weight, and in the level of dissatisfaction with their bodies. However, a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should not be given when the disturbance occurs only during episodes of anorexia nervosa (Criterion E).', 'Individuals with bulimia nervosa typically are within the normal weight or overweight range (body mass index [BMI] = 18.5 and < 30 in adults). The disorder occurs but is uncommon among obese individuals. Between eating binges, individuals with bulimia nervosa typically restrict their total caloric consumption and preferentially select low-calorie (“diet”) foods while avoiding foods that they perceive to be fattening or likely to trigger a binge.', 'Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea often occurs among females with bulimia nervosa; it is uncertain whether such disturbances are related to weight fluctuations, to nutritional deficiencies, or to emotional distress. The fluid and electrolyte disturbances resulting from the purging behavior are sometimes sufficiently severe to constitute medically serious problems. Rare but potentially fatal complications include esophageal tears, gastric rupture, and cardiac arrhythmias. Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following repeated use of syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Individuals who chronically abuse laxatives may become dependent on their use to stimulate bowel movements. Gastrointestinal symptoms are commonly associated with bulimia nervosa, and rectal prolapse has also been reported among individuals with this disorder(Mitchell and Crow 2006).', 'Twelve-month prevalence of bulimia nervosa among young females is 1%–1.5%(Hoek 2006; Smink et al. 2012). Point prevalence is highest among young adults since the disorder peaks in older adolescence and young adulthood. Less is known about the point prevalence of bulimia nervosa in males, but bulimia nervosa is far less common in males than it is in females, with an approximately 10:1 female-to-male ratio(Keski-Rahkonen et al. 2009; Marques et al. 2011; Swanson et al. 2011)', 'Bulimia nervosa commonly begins in adolescence or young adulthood(Hoek et al. 1995; Hudson et al. 2007; Striegel-Moore et al. 2003). Onset before puberty or after age 40 is uncommon. The binge eating frequently begins during or after an episode of dieting to lose weight. Experiencing multiple stressful life events also can precipitate onset of bulimia nervosa.', 'Disturbed eating behavior persists for at least several years in a high percentage of clinic samples. The course may be chronic or intermittent, with periods of remission alternating with recurrences of binge eating. However, over longer-term follow-up, the symptoms of many individuals appear to diminish with or without treatment, although treatment clearly impacts outcome. Periods of remission longer than 1 year are associated with better long-term outcome.', 'Significantly elevated risk for mortality (all-cause and suicide) has been reported for individuals with bulimia nervosa (Keel and Brown 2010; Steinhausen and Weber 2009; van Son et al. 2010). The CMR (crude mortality rate) for bulimia nervosa is nearly 2% per decade(Arcelus et al. 2011; Smink et al. 2012).', 'Diagnostic cross-over from initial bulimia nervosa to anorexia nervosa occurs in a minority of cases (10%–15%). Individuals who do experience cross-over to anorexia nervosa commonly will revert back to bulimia nervosa or have multiple occurrences of cross-overs between these disorders. A subset of individuals with bulimia nervosa continue to binge eat but no longer engage in inappropriate compensatory behaviors, and therefore their symptoms meet criteria for binge-eating disorder or other specified eating disorder. Diagnosis should be based on the current (i.e., past 3 months) clinical presentation.', 'Temperamental', 'Weight concerns, low self-esteem, depressive symptoms, social anxiety disorder, and overanxious disorder of childhood are associated with increased risk for the development of bulimia nervosa.', 'Environmental', 'Internalization of a thin body ideal has been found to increase risk for developing weight concerns, which in turn increase risk for the development of bulimia nervosa. Individuals who experienced childhood sexual or physical abuse are at increased risk for developing bulimia nervosa.', 'Genetic and physiological', 'Childhood obesity and early pubertal maturation increase risk for bulimia nervosa. Familial transmission of bulimia nervosa may be present, as well as genetic vulnerabilities for the disorder(Jacobi et al. 2004; Striegel-Moore and Bulik 2007).', 'Course modifiers', 'Severity of psychiatric comorbidity predicts worse long-term outcome of bulimia nervosa (Keel and Brown 2010).', 'Bulimia nervosa has been reported to occur with roughly similar frequencies in most industrialized countries, including the United States, Canada, many European countries, Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and South Africa. In clinical studies of bulimia nervosa in the United States, individuals presenting with this disorder are primarily white. However, the disorder also occurs in other ethnic groups and with prevalence comparable to estimated prevalences observed in white samples(Marques et al. 2011).Bulimia nervosa is far more common in females than in males. Males are especially underrepresented in treatment-seeking samples, for reasons that have not yet been systematically examined(Striegel et al. 2012).No specific diagnostic test for bulimia nervosa currently exists(Striegel et al. 2012). However, several laboratory abnormalities may occur as a consequence of purging and may increase diagnostic certainty. These include fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypokalemia (which can provoke cardiac arrhythmias), hypochloremia, and hyponatremia. The loss of gastric acid through vomiting may produce a metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), and the frequent induction of diarrhea or dehydration through laxative and diuretic abuse can cause metabolic acidosis. Some individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit mildly elevated levels of serum amylase, probably reflecting an increase in the salivary isoenzyme.Physical examination usually yields no physical findings. However, inspection of the mouth may reveal significant and permanent loss of dental enamel, especially from lingual surfaces of the front teeth due to recurrent vomiting. These teeth may become chipped and appear ragged and “moth-eaten.” There may also be an increased frequency of dental caries. In some individuals, the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, may become notably enlarged. Individuals who induce vomiting by manually stimulating the gag reflex may develop calluses or scars on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact with the teeth. Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following repeated use of syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting.Suicide risk is elevated in bulimia nervosa. Comprehensive evaluation of individuals with this disorder should include assessment of suicide-related ideation and behaviors as well as other risk factors for suicide, including a history of suicide attempts(Crow et al. 2009; Franko and Keel 2006).Individuals with bulimia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with the disorder. A minority of individuals report severe role impairment, with the social-life domain most likely to be adversely affected by bulimia nervosa.', 'Anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type', 'Individuals whose binge-eating behavior occurs only during episodes of anorexia nervosa are given the diagnosis anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, and should not be given the additional diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. For individuals with an initial diagnosis of anorexia nervosa who binge and purge but whose presentation no longer meets the full criteria for anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type (e.g., when weight is normal), a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should be given only when all criteria for bulimia nervosa have been met for at least 3 months.', 'Binge-eating disorder', 'Some individuals binge eat but do not engage in regular inappropriate compensatory behaviors. In these cases, the diagnosis of binge-eating disorder should be considered.', 'Kleine-Levin syndrome', 'In certain neurological or other medical conditions, such as Kleine-Levin syndrome, there is disturbed eating behavior, but the characteristic psychological features of bulimia nervosa, such as overconcern with body shape and weight, are not present.', 'Major depressive disorder, with atypical features', 'Overeating is common in major depressive disorder, with atypical features, but individuals with this disorder do not engage in inappropriate compensatory behaviors and do not exhibit the excessive concern with body shape and weight characteristic of bulimia nervosa. If criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses should be given.', 'Borderline personality disorder', 'Binge-eating behavior is included in the impulsive behavior criterion that is part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the criteria for both borderline personality disorder and bulimia nervosa are met, both diagnoses should be given.', 'Comorbidity with mental disorders is common in individuals with bulimia nervosa, with most experiencing at least one other mental disorder and many experiencing multiple comorbidities. Comorbidity is not limited to any particular subset but rather occurs across a wide range of mental disorders. There is an increased frequency of depressive symptoms (e.g., low self-esteem) and bipolar and depressive disorders (particularly depressive disorders) in individuals with bulimia nervosa. In many individuals, the mood disturbance begins at the same time as or following the development of bulimia nervosa, and individuals often ascribe their mood disturbances to the bulimia nervosa. However, in some individuals, the mood disturbance clearly precedes the development of bulimia nervosa. There may also be an increased frequency of anxiety symptoms (e.g., fear of social situations) or anxiety disorders. These mood and anxiety disturbances frequently remit following effective treatment of the bulimia nervosa. The lifetime prevalence of substance use, particularly alcohol or stimulant use, is at least 30% among individuals with bulimia nervosa. Stimulant use often begins in an attempt to control appetite and weight. A substantial percentage of individuals with bulimia nervosa also have personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders, most frequently borderline personality disorder (Herpertz-Dahlmann 2009; Marques et al. 2011; Swanson et al. 2011; Woodside and Staab 2006).', '', '']