['Enuresis', 'Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes, whether involuntary or intentional.', 'The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency of at least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of clinically significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning.', 'Chronological age is at least 5 years (or equivalent developmental level).', 'The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g., diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder).', ' Specify whether:', 'Nocturnal only: Passage of urine only during nighttime sleep.', 'Diurnal only: Passage of urine during waking hours.', 'Nocturnal and diurnal: A combination of the two subtypes above.', 'The nocturnal-only subtype of enuresis, sometimes referred to as monosymptomatic enuresis, is the most common subtype and involves incontinence only during nighttime sleep, typically during the first one-third of the night. The diurnal-only subtype occurs in the absence of nocturnal enuresis and may be referred to simply as urinary incontinence. Individuals with this subtype can be divided into two groups. Individuals with “urge incontinence” have sudden urge symptoms and detrusor instability, whereas individuals with “voiding postponement” consciously defer micturition urges until incontinence results. The nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype is also known as nonmonosymptomatic enuresis.', 'The essential feature of enuresis is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night into bed or clothes (Criterion A). Most often the voiding is involuntary, but occasionally it may be intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). The individual must have reached an age at which continence is expected (i.e., a chronological age of at least 5 years or, for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 5 years) (Criterion C). The urinary incontinence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g., diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder) (Criterion D).', 'During nocturnal enuresis, occasionally the voiding takes place during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and the child may recall a dream that involved the act of urinating. During daytime (diurnal) enuresis, the child defers voiding until incontinence occurs, sometimes because of a reluctance to use the toilet as a result of social anxiety or a preoccupation with school or play activity. The enuretic event most commonly occurs in the early afternoon on school days and may be associated with symptoms of disruptive behavior. The enuresis commonly persists after appropriate treatment of an associated infection.', 'The prevalence of enuresis is 5%–10% among 5-year-olds, 3%–5% among 10-year-olds, and around 1% among individuals 15 years or older.Two types of course of enuresis have been described: a “primary” type, in which the individual has never established urinary continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the disturbance develops after a period of established urinary continence. There are no differences in prevalence of comorbid mental disorders between the two types. By definition, primary enuresis begins at age 5 years. The most common time for the onset of secondary enuresis is between ages 5 and 8 years, but it may occur at any time. After age 5 years, the rate of spontaneous remission is 5%–10% per year. Most children with the disorder become continent by adolescence, but in approximately 1% of cases the disorder continues into adulthood. Diurnal enuresis is uncommon after age 9 years. While occasional diurnal incontinence is not uncommon in middle childhood, it is substantially more common in those who also have persistent nocturnal enuresis. When enuresis persists into late childhood or adolescence, the frequency of incontinence may increase, whereas continence in early childhood is usually associated with a declining frequency of wet nights.A number of predisposing factors for enuresis have been suggested, including delayed or lax toilet training and psychosocial stress.Enuresis has been associated with delays in the development of normal circadian rhythms of urine production, with resulting nocturnal polyuria or abnormalities of central vasopressin receptor sensitivity, and reduced functional bladder capacities with bladder hyperreactivity (unstable bladder syndrome). Nocturnal enuresis is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Heritability has been shown in family, twin, and segregation analyses(von Gontard et al. 2011). Risk for childhood nocturnal enuresis is approximately 3.6 times higher in offspring of enuretic mothers and 10.1 times higher in the presence of paternal urinary incontinence. The risk magnitudes for nocturnal enuresis and diurnal incontinence are similar.Enuresis has been reported in a variety of European, African, and Asian countries as well as in the United States. At a national level, prevalence rates are remarkably similar, and there is great similarity in the developmental trajectories found in different countries. There are very high rates of enuresis in orphanages and other residential institutions, likely related to the mode and environment in which toilet training occurs. Nocturnal enuresis is more common in males. Diurnal incontinence is more common in females. The relative risk of having a child who develops enuresis is greater for previously enuretic fathers than for previously enuretic mothers. The amount of impairment associated with enuresis is a function of the limitation on the child’s social activities (e.g., ineligibility for sleep-away camp) or its effect on the child’s self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment, and rejection on the part of caregivers.', 'Neurogenic bladder or another medical condition', 'The diagnosis of enuresis is not made in the presence of a neurogenic bladder or another medical condition that causes polyuria or urgency (e.g., untreated diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus) or during an acute urinary tract infection. However, a diagnosis is compatible with such conditions if urinary incontinence was regularly present prior to the development of another medical condition or if it persists after the institution of appropriate treatment of the medical condition.', 'Medication side effects', 'Enuresis may occur during treatment with antipsychotic medications, diuretics, or other medications that may induce incontinence. In this case, the diagnosis should not be made in isolation but may be noted as a medication side effect. However, a diagnosis of enuresis may be made if urinary incontinence was regularly present prior to treatment with the medication.', 'Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid mental disorder, the prevalence of comorbid behavioral symptoms is higher in children with enuresis than in children without enuresis. Developmental delays, including speech, language, learning, and motor skills delays, are also present in a portion of children with enuresis. Encopresis, sleepwalking, and sleep terror disorder may be present. Urinary tract infections are more common in children with enuresis, especially the diurnal subtype, than in those who are continent.', '', '']