['Encopresis', 'Repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing, floor), whether involuntary or intentional.', 'At least one such event occurs each month for at least 3 months.', 'Chronological age is at least 4 years (or equivalent developmental level).', 'The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or another medical condition except through a mechanism involving constipation.', 'Specify whether:', 'With constipation and overflow incontinence: There is evidence of constipation on physical examination or by history.', 'Without constipation and overflow incontinence: There is no evidence of constipation on physical examination or by history.', 'Feces in the with constipation and overflow incontinence subtype are characteristically (but not invariably) poorly formed, and leakage can be infrequent to continuous, occurring mostly during the day and rarely during sleep. Only part of the feces is passed during toileting, and the incontinence resolves after treatment of the constipation.', 'In the without constipation and overflow incontinence subtype, feces are likely to be of normal form and consistency, and soiling is intermittent. Feces may be deposited in a prominent location. This is usually associated with the presence of oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder or may be the consequence of anal masturbation. Soiling without constipation appears to be less common than soiling with constipation.', 'The essential feature of encopresis is repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing or floor) (Criterion A). Most often the passage is involuntary but occasionally may be intentional. The event must occur at least once a month for at least 3 months (Criterion B), and the chronological age of the child must be at least 4 years (or for children with developmental delays, the mental age must be at least 4 years) (Criterion C). The fecal incontinence must not be exclusively attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or another medical condition except through a mechanism involving constipation (Criterion D).', 'When the passage of feces is involuntary rather than intentional, it is often related to constipation, impaction, and retention with subsequent overflow. The constipation may develop for psychological reasons (e.g., anxiety about defecating in a particular place, a more general pattern of anxious or oppositional behavior), leading to avoidance of defecation. Physiological predispositions to constipation include ineffectual straining or paradoxical defecation dynamics, with contraction rather than relaxation of the external sphincter or pelvic floor during straining for defecation. Dehydration associated with a febrile illness, hypothyroidism, or a medication side effect can also induce constipation. Once constipation has developed, it may be complicated by an anal fissure, painful defecation, and further fecal retention. The consistency of the stool may vary. In some individuals the stool may be of normal or near-normal consistency. In other individuals—such as those with overflow incontinence secondary to fecal retention—it may be liquid.', "The child with encopresis often feels ashamed and may wish to avoid situations (e.g., camp, school) that might lead to embarrassment. The amount of impairment is a function of the effect on the child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment, and rejection on the part of caregivers. Smearing feces may be deliberate or accidental, resulting from the child’s attempt to clean or hide feces that were passed involuntarily. When the incontinence is clearly deliberate, features of oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder may also be present. Many children with encopresis and chronic constipation also have enuresis symptoms and may have associated urinary reflux in the bladder or ureters that may lead to chronic urinary infections, the symptoms of which may remit with treatment of the constipation.It is estimated that approximately 1% of 5-year-olds have encopresis, and the disorder is more common in males than in females.Encopresis is not diagnosed until a child has reached a chronological age of at least 4 years (or for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years). Inadequate, inconsistent toilet training and psychosocial stress (e.g., entering school, the birth of a sibling) may be predisposing factors. Two types of course have been described: a “primary” type, in which the individual has never established fecal continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the disturbance develops after a period of established fecal continence. Encopresis can persist, with intermittent exacerbations, for years.", 'Genetic and physiological', 'Painful defecation can lead to constipation and a cycle of withholding behaviors that make encopresis more likely(Philichi 2008). Use of some medications (e.g., anticonvulsants, cough suppressants) may increase constipation and make encopresis more likely(Philichi 2008).', 'In addition to physical examination, gastrointestinal imaging (e.g., abdominal radiograph) may be informative to assess retained stool and gas in the colon. Additional tests, such as barium enema and anorectal manography, may be used to help exclude other medical conditions, such as Hirschsprung’s disease.A diagnosis of encopresis in the presence of another medical condition is appropriate only if the mechanism involves constipation that cannot be explained by other medical conditions. Fecal incontinence related to other medical conditions (e.g., chronic diarrhea, spina bifida, anal stenosis) would not warrant a DSM-5 diagnosis of encopresis.Urinary tract infections can be comorbid with encopresis and are more common in females(Philichi 2008).', '', '']